Daily practices for your mind & mental health

Just Breathe Level 1 Training
Functional Breath Awareness, Systematic Breathwork
Techniques & Nervous System Regulation

DAILY PRACTICES FOR YOUR
MIND & MENTAL HEALTH

THIS MANUAL BELONGS TO

OUR PROMISE

Diversity and inclusion is at the core of who
we are. We are advocates for equality and
strive to ensure access is available to those
in need. Above all else, we believe in creating
spaces and conversations where everyone
is welcome and feels like they belong.

JUST BREATHE

‘Notice what you
notice, feel what you
feel, let this moment
be all that is real.’
MICHAEL JAMES WONG

02

Hi Friends,
Welcome to Just Breathe and to your level 1 training for functional breath awareness,
systematic breathwork techniques and nervous system regulation.
We are excited to have you with us and cannot wait to begin. As we embark on this course
we ask that you commit to yourself fully and be open to the experience to come. Give
yourself time to be here completely and let your practice unfold. As the course begins
start gently, the first part of this training is to turn inwards and cultivate your committed
personal practice.
Throughout the course you will have many self-awareness experiences, these will be your
greatest teacher. This course is dedicated to educating and supporting your path to
guiding and sharing breathwork, meditation and deep rest practices.
Our aim with this level 1 training course is to empower you with the tools and techniques
to safely guide others in these quiet practices. Our training approach is founded on the
principles of; awareness, education and experience and we believe in a multidisciplinary
agnostic approach to ensure that our support, and your support, is as accessible and
approachable as possible.
Throughout the course we will dive into a comprehensive understanding of functional
and systematic breathwork practices that take learnings and inspiration from both yogic
breathing practices and modern breath science understanding. We will also explore
meditation insights and explore the being technique and various other modalities.
We are equally committed to ensuring that background, cultural context and scientific
influences and references are shared where relevant.
We understand that everyone participating in this course joins us for different reasons;
personal, professional or otherwise and it is our hope that we can provide a curriculum
and course experience that supports each individual intentions for learning and guiding
these practices.
At Just Breathe we are an inclusive community where everyone is welcome and are
dedicated to ensure that these practices are available and accessible to those in need.
Taking care of your well-being is not only for the privileged and we are working hard to
ensure this course, training and curriculum are accessible for anyone interested in
learning with us.
We are honoured to be on this path together and I want you to know that you belong.
Thank you for choosing to join Just Breathe, a place for community, connection and quiet.

Yours in stillness.

Michael James Wong
Michael James Wong
Just Breathe Founder

03

JUST BREATHE

close your eyes
be still
just breathe

04

Contents

SUBSECTION TITLE

09

1
From STRESS to REST
Prioritising your mind and mental health

42

2 Breathwork fundamentals
Using the breath to facilitate systematic change

88

122

MODULE 1

Anatomy of the breath

MODULE 2

Functional breath awareness & mechanics of breathing

MODULE 3

Physiology, mechanic of breathing & respiratory system

MODULE 4

Systematic breathing techniques & nervous system

3 Meditation modalities
Understanding the 3 depths of the mind
MODULE 5

The thinking mind; intro to meditation

MODULE 6

Un-doing the mind; established in being

MODULE 7

Observations of the mind; present moment awareness

MODULE 8

Attention of the mind; focused intention

4 Integration & teaching methods
NSRT sequences & breathwork protocols
MODULE 9

186

Nervous system regulation techniques (NRST)

MODULE 10

ABC123 Breathwork Method

MODULE 11

The Just Breathe Method

MODULE 12

Signature practice, protocols & sequences

5 Principles of guidance
Techniques & insights for sharing the practice

05

OUR METHOD

Just Breathe is a practice of quiet
connection that uses the power of
breathwork, meditation and deep rest
to help manage stress, reduce hyper
stimulation and down regulate the
nervous system.

OUR MISSION

To teach the world to breathe
better and stress less

OUR MANTRA

Time well spent

JUST BREATHE

08

1

SUBSECTION TITLE

From STRESS
to REST
Prioritising your mind
and mental health

09

JUST BREATHE

Just Breathe Invitation
For all Just Breathe practices we invite you to begin with our opening invitation,
a calling of attention into this present moment. This mantra is a ritual beginning,
one of sacred significance to our community. Please use this within your personal
practice and for when you guide others. In the traditions of practice, opening
invocations carry deep meaning of connection let this now be yours.

Close your eyes
When we close the eyes or soften the gaze, we begin to narrow
our concentration and move our sensory awareness inward. This
intentional act of transition helps to cultivate our attention and place
it with meaningful intention. Closing the eyes is a sign of transition and
beginning and in this first action of practice, we are signalling to ourselves
and the stimulus around us that we are moving towards less. While we
offer the phrase ‘close your eyes’ as the invitation, we can also simply
soften the gaze to something less. This is to ensure that all situational
and/or personal circumstances are appreciated. Some people may
prefer a soft gaze, or because of past experiences or location of practice,
may not feel comfortable to close them completely. And so we should
ensure you share this context and interchangeable invitation, both valid
and meaningful ways to begin.

Be still
The action of becoming still can be seen as a defiant one in our busy world.
When we intentionally move towards moving towards a less stimulated
state of attention, we are choosing to move away from the temptations of
our surrounding environments and mental distractions. Stillness is not a
destination or definitive occurrence, but instead a constant commitment to
moving in a less stimulated state of action.

Just breathe
Whether it’s breathwork, meditation or deep rest, simplify. And then begin.

10

FROM STRESS TO REST

The 3 Gratitudes
The 3 Gratitudes is a ritual closing for our Just Breathe practices. It is a ceremony of
acknowledgement and gratitude using three intentional breaths that carry significance and
sincerity. The first breath is for you, to honour yourself for taking the time to practice. The
second breath is the breath of support, the breath for others and the final breath is the
breath of gratitude for being present in this moment as it is completely. A ritualistic closing
appreciates the sacredness of time well spent. Use this powerful closing as a way to finish
your personal practice, or share with others when you are guiding them.

A breath for you
The first breath is always the breath for you. A breath of
acknowledgment for you as you are. Managing our well-being requires
both effort and commitment, and in cultivating meaningful awareness,
we must always ensure we are acknowledging ourselves for choosing to
be in this moment, right here completely.

A breath for support
The second breath is for the appreciation of others, whether it’s the
people in your life that support you, the ones that show up for you and
are there for you in your times of need, this breath is for them. If you are
practising together with a group, perhaps this breath is for the collective
energy and attention. This breath of support can be for anyone or
anything that supports you.

A breath for this moment
The final breath is the breath of gratitude for this moment and the
power of these quiet practice. A moment to appreciate exactly as it is,
nothing more, nothing less, simply as time well spent.

11

JUST BREATHE

‘When we remove the
distractions of life,
all that remains is joy.’
MICHAEL JAMES WONG

12

FROM STRESS TO REST

New beginnings

Welcome. Now that you’re here, let’s begin.
To begin anything new, we must start with purposeful
intention, a just cause for meaningful transition. In many
cultures and traditions, new beginnings are considered
sacred rituals, doorways in which we step through into a
new world of discovery.
And so here we begin, transitioning from what was, into
what is. And this time we will do it together.

WHAT IS YOUR WHY?
Let’s start with your why. Why are you here. What do you want to learn throughout this course?
use the space to below to write and share your thoughts.

A practice of quiet connection
The practices of breathwork, meditation and deep rest
can have a profound impact on our overall health and
well-being. As a collective, we call them practices of quiet
connection. Before we learn techniques, it’s important to
acknowledge what the importance of these practices is
and why we need them as an essential part to our daily
lives.
Often we first speak about the benefits of these quiet
practice to help manage stress, reducing over stimulation
and down regulating the nervous system, but these are
not the ‘why’, but actually a part of the ‘what’, or more
specifically, ‘what’ happens when we take a moment to Just
Breathe. In most cases the what is breathwork, meditation
and deep rest, and these are the three essential parts of
any Just Breathe practice. This is our method.

Each modality individually serves undeniable value, but
together, when sequenced in succession, they create a
truly powerful practice that allows the body, mind and
moment to be truly in a state of peace and quiet.
So what is the why? By building a toolbox of techniques and
establishing a consistent practice, we unlock and reveal
the necessary access to an immediate and direct ability to
manage yourself in any and all situations of stress.
Why we practice is ultimately to help minimise the reactive
attachments we have in our lives, and to widen the gap
between stimulus and conscious response. And when
we do, we can live our lives with a sense of unconditional
freedom and unbiased choice.

13

JUST BREATHE

Breathwork

Functional

Systematic

Experiential

NERVOUS SYSTEM RECOGNITION

NERVOUS SYSTEM REGULATION

NERVOUS SYSTEM RELEASE

Respiratory physiology

Self-sustainable techniques

Full body-mind connection

Stress management

Proactive essential practices

Hyper stimulation reduction

Guidance for responsive sequences

Conscious awareness
and expanded states

Breath variability

Manipulation of techniques,
ratio and rounds

Breath awareness

Recovery and safety protocol
Emotional release

Quality vs. quantity axis

Voluntary vs. involuntary

ABC123 VARIABLE
BREATHING TECHNIQUES

Non-ordinary states of consciousness

Diaphragmatic, costal, clavicular

Direct Response

Active and effortful hyperventilation

Active, passive, recovery

Gradual Response

HOW WE BREATHE

TRANSFORMATIONAL BREATHING

Nasal vs. mouth breathing
4-part breathing architecture
Anatomy of the breath
WHY WE BREATHE
Sympathetic /
parasympathetic divisions
Down regulation vs. up regulation

EXHALE & ESSENTIAL
DAILY PRACTICES

Conscious connected breathing

Incl: calming, soothing,
grounding, balancing

Somatic introspection

Down regulating, awakening,
energising, uplifting
Daily 5 & Gentle 10
movement exercises

Cardiovascular & lung health
NSRT METHOD FOR
PRACTICE GUIDANCE
Technical execution and combinations
Elements of supportive response
Key factors of facilitation

14

HOLOTROPIC BREATHING

Constant and continuous

FROM STRESS TO REST

Meditation

Established
In Being

Present Moment
Awareness

Focused
Intention

EXPANDED AND
CONNECTED AWARENESS

INWARD OR
ATTENTIONAL AWARENESS

OUTWARD OR
INTENTIONAL AWARENESS
Creative and imaginative
low stress stimulation

Cultivating awareness

Open monitoring techniques

Observation of the witness state

De-stimulating the mind

6 phases of non-doing
Removing attachment triggers

Intuitive self awareness
and embodiment

Gentle down regulation narration

Effortless mind state

Reducing intellectual translation

Emotionally led feeling states

Breath awareness

Developing non-thinking
sensory response

Intellectually guided refinement

Quality vs. quantity axis

Just Breathe Meditation

Body Scan

Loving Kindness (Metta Bhavana)

Being ‘Mantra’ Meditation

Trataka (focused gaze)

Ajapa-japa (Mantra repetition)

5 Bodies

Visualisation

5 Senses

Guided meditation (Intention led)

Breath awareness

15

JUST BREATHE

Our
Just
Breathe
Method
The Just Breathe Method uses a three pillar approach.
This purposefully prepares us for down regulation,
inwardness and rest. While each pillar can be practised
individually, when combined they are exponentially more
valuable for our conscious unwinding.

16

FROM STRESS TO REST

1

2

3

Breathwork

Meditation

Deep Rest

A breathwork practice
utilises the movement
and manipulation of
the breathing pattern
to help create nervous
system regulation. These
techniques and practices
can be balancing, calming
or energising, but all serve
a specific purpose for
helping us breathe better
and shift towards the
parasympathetic state.

Meditation is a
concentrative or
contemplative practice
that helps to quiet the
mind and return us
to a state of ease and
effortlessness. Utilising
different techniques and
practices, we can help
to reduce the cyclical
stimulation we acquire
on our mental load and
alleviate stress and strain.
A meaningful practice will
help to increase clarity,
decisiveness and a sense
of vibrancy and capacity.

Deep rest is the
intentional state of
conscious unwinding over
a dedicated period of
time. When we allow the
body to rest without any
predetermined action
or technique, we give
way to deep relaxation,
an essential state of
recovery, healing and
rejuvenation.

17

JUST BREATHE

Everyday practices for
your mind & mental health
Our aim at Just Breathe is simple. We are mission driven
to ensure that as many people as possible have access and
awareness to everyday practices for your mind and mental
health. Whether this is learning how to meditate, or taking
time for a breathing practice, bettering their sleep or
quietening their mind, we are here to help.
These days, there are increasing modalities and techniques
that can help support your personal health and well-

being, and our focus is on the ones that down regulate the
nervous system, de-stress the body and support response
driven behaviours. While there are many to discover, at
Just Breathe we generalise these types of techniques
under the category of quiet practices.
For us, quiet practices are any down-regulated practices
that support the five critical pillars of our well-being;
physical, mental and emotional, social, spiritual and
environmental.

The 5 pillars of well-being
1. Physical
The physical body constantly lives in a state of stress
and exertion. We are high wired for action and reaction.
And while there are many types of physical practices
that support our overall well-being, our focus are on the
ones that are predicated on down-regulating the nervous
system, easing physical strain and stress and encouraging
the body into a state of rest and relaxation. This is essential
in a world built for effort and achievement.
2. Mental & Emotional
The mind is in constant flux, managing the countless
micro-triggers of past experiences (good or bad), traumas
(big or small) in hopes of navigating and make sense of the
world around us. We are busy people, in a busy world with
extremely busy minds. And so, we must have practices that
help to quieten the noise around and within. Practices for
the mind help to ease anxiousness and provide us with the
tools to deal with the amount of mental unrest we acquire
on a daily basis. Practices that soothe and settle a thinking
mind are the ones that truly make a difference to our
mental health.
Emotions are like rising tides, they come and go, with
different levels of magnitude and experiences. And so we
must have practices that support us when in the swings of
uncertainty, when temper flairs or anxiety peaks. Knowing
how to use the breath to come back down from a swinging
feeling, or understand the power of a pause, these are the
practices that truly help our well-being.

18

3. Social
As humans we are social creatures, yet we spend so much
of our lives in solitude without a true sense of connection
and belonging. To support our well-being we must commit
to the practice of community, to be in like-minded company
of others. And so, we must practice together at times, to
breathe together, to sit in stillness together, to share in
quiet conversation together. These are powerful practices
that support our highest sense of well-being.
4. Spiritual
Spirituality can mean many different things to many
different people, and our intention here is never to place
any specific perspective or belief system on anyone’s
personal life or practices. So when we speak of spiritual
well-being, we are speaking of a sense of spirit and selfbelief, an enlivenment of joy and that which invigorates and
nourishes you and gives you a deep sense of connection to
living. And so, we must have practices that give you energy,
a sense of uplift and vibrancy, ones that wake you up while
connecting you wholeheartedly.
5. Environmental
Your environment plays an essential role in your wellbeing. Environment can be the location in which we
live, the access to nature or surrounding spaciousness.
Environment can be the land we live on and the interaction
we have with it in our daily lives, and access to basic human
amenities like water and fresh air. However environment
can also be the domicile you keep and the state of your
household. If we live in a state of clutter or uncertainty, or
exist in an unsupported or safe living situation, these are
environmental factors that can affect our well-being.

FROM STRESS TO REST

WHAT IS YOUR CURRENT RELATIONSHIP
WITH THE 5 PILLARS OF WELL-BEING?

PHYSICAL

MENTAL & EMOTIONAL

SOCIAL

SPIRITUAL

ENVIRONMENTAL

19

JUST BREATHE

The Big Six
Common ‘everyday’ stress triggers
What is stress? Stress is our body’s response to pressure.
Many different situations or life events can cause stress.
It is often triggered when we experience something
new or unexpected that threatens our sense of self or
when we feel we have little control over a situation. In
these moments our biology responds and enacts the
sympathetic response, or the fight or flight response.
When we accumulate stress in our nervous system, it
begins to disrupt our ability to self regulate and stay in the
parasympathetic response. In short, our nervous system
spikes and becomes highly reactionary.

When this happens, daily stressors, or stress triggers,
become significantly more disruptive and dysregulated.
It is only with intentional, direct or gradual response
techniques that can we begin to better manage stress and
the inundation of stimulation that is around, and within us.
Learning to manage your stress means to first become
aware of it and better identify what is creating stress in
your life.

S T R
Situational Occurrences

Time

Responsibilities

Unplanned or unanticipated moments
of displacement. These are the
things that knock us off course and
create challenges and frustrating
inconveniences.

Time, or the lack of it, leaves us feeling
like we’re always behind. Often when
the time we feel we need doesn’t
match the time we actually have,
this spikes the nervous system and
triggers a stress response.

Being human means to have real and/
or perceived obligations placed upon
us. Being responsible for tasks, other
people or finite circumstances often
means we are limited in our absolute
freedom.

20

FROM STRESS TO REST

E S S
Emotions

Societal Expectation

Sleep

Our emotional reactions are how we
perceive the world around us and the
occurrences that happen to us. We
each receive and react differently to
stimulus, this can be a compounding
factor for stress.

Whether put upon you by others,
or put upon ourselves based on the
world around us, expectations are
the load we carry of other's opinions.
Normalcy or decency has no definitive
or ‘one size fits all’ outcome.

Getting a good night's rest plays an
exponential role in your overall wellbeing and your capacity to manage the
unplanned and pressurised moments
in your day. Sleep is a measure of both
quantity and quality and is something
that should be non-negotiable in your
daily life and routine.

21

JUST BREATHE

The Stress Container
In the stress container model, the level of vulnerability a
person carries is represented by the size of a container
into which everyday stresses flow. Those who have low
vulnerability are less likely to experience mental health
issues. They have large containers.

When the container overflows, the person is
overwhelmed and mental and physical illness can arise.
This is also known as our stress signature. Stresses
need to be dealt with to create capacity in the
container and stay healthy.

The size of the container can be due to a lot of factors from
someone’s background, e.g. being bullied or abused as a
child. The more of these factors there are, the smaller the
container, so it will overflow more quickly than a larger
container/low vulnerability. For example, two people
who are in a highly stressful occupation and under high
levels of stress may react differently depending on their
vulnerability due to genetic factors or past trauma.

There is a tap on the stress container to release stress
before it overflows. There is a gap at the bottom of
the container below the tap where stresses in life
can become trapped. Some stresses are too large
to exit the tap. This is normal and sometimes certain
stressors can’t be dealt with at that time. Our stress
containers are never completely empty. It is about
actively managing what is in there.

Stress flows into the container

If the container
overflows then
problems develop
Vulnerability is shown by
the size of the container

Helpful coping strategies
allow the tap to work and
stress is released.
Unhelpful coping
strategies mean the tap
becomes blocked, the
stress builds and the
container can overflow.

REFERENCE: STRESS CONTAINER, MHFA

22

FROM STRESS TO REST

MY STRESS CONTAINER

Take a moment to think about all the concerning and
stressful things in your life, work, study or personal life
before you answer the questions below.

What's inside my stress container?

What's within my control that I can change or better manage?

What needs my urgent attention?

What are my helpful coping strategies?

What are my unhelpful coping strategies?

23

JUST BREATHE

Understanding the
importance of rest
Rest is a conscious state of healing and recovery. When
we rest we are choosing to prioritise our well-being and
intentionally do less. Resting is both a state of action and
inaction and when we rest we are stepping away from the
inundation of stimulus and noise around us at all times.

consciously rest, using practices like meditation or deep
rest, or just simply taking time to not do, we are choosing
to be presently aware in the inaction of resting. When we
rest, we must ensure that time is a relevant factor in our
participation. A moment of rest is exponentially different
than an hour.

Rest and sleep are not the same, nor are they mutually
exclusive, when we sleep we are moving into an
unconscious state of rest, but when we actively and

Simply put, REST is the reduction of external stimulus
over a prolonged period of time.

R

E

Reduce

External

The action of reduction is an intentional effort to do
less. Whether it is to reduce or remove, the reduction of
our noise, surroundings, distractions or temptations is
necessary to move us towards rest.

One of the biggest factors of our mental load is the
external relationship we have to things pulling our attention
outward. The external is defined as anything not within your
control and sense of self.

24

FROM STRESS TO REST

S

T

Stimulus

Time

Everything is stimulus, from the noises around, to the
people you interact with, to the outside sensations you see,
hear and feel. Even your thoughts and creative ideas are
stimulus. We live in a world where we are hyper stimulated
which moves our nervous system into a state of disregulation. In order to rest, we must actively reduce and
remove stimulus.

The benefit of most good things for your health and
well-being becomes exponentially more effective over a
prolonged period of time. Whether it’s sleep, meditation
or moments of low to no technology, we benefit greatly by
expanding the time of non-doing. To rest well is to ensure
you are giving adequate time for unwinding.

25

JUST BREATHE

Our values
As a Just Breathe guide, your
opportunity is to help people feel
something; something calming,
something easeful, something
empowering or something deeply
restful. When we guide others
we are not telling them what they
should feel, we are merely creating
the space and opportunity in which
they can feel for themselves. Often
in a busy and challenging world, we
can all live too fast, too hard and
too loud. This is your opportunity
to be truly impactful in peoples
lives.
Now we are ready to look at how
we can share and guide others in
the practice. In this section we will
look at the techniques in how we
create and cultivate meaningful
practices to share with others.
Knowing what to share is different
than understanding how to share it
and so it’s important to learn how
best to share a practice that is
both valuable and experiential.
As you go forward as a Just
Breathe guide, we have three core
values we abide by;

1. Awareness
Establish the witness

2. Education
Commitment to learning

3. Experience
A valuable and meaningful moment

26

Awareness
Establish the witness
For anything to be impactful in our lives we must first
become aware of it, whether it’s a habitual pattern that
needs to change, a routine that needs updating or an
indulgent behaviour that needs a significant shift, we
must first become aware of its effect on our well-being
and lifestyle. Practical techniques like meditation and
breathwork are most potent when facilitated from a
starting point of internal self-awareness and so we must
diligently begin the process of this work by cultivating the
ability to witness and be self observant. This before any
techniques is essential
But how does one learn to be self-aware? What is the
process for cultivation? Well the answer is perhaps simpler
than you may realise. We must live in the state of ‘what
is’. All too often we exist intellectually in the state of ‘what
was’ or ‘what might be’, or often ‘what it is not’, and in these
altered states of perspective we remove the actuality of
being aware of what is happening, as it’s happening.
But doing this, being in this state, is in fact, much harder
than simply wanting to be, hence the need for constant
cultivation. The act of cultivation is not merely a moment of
dedicated attention, but rather a continuous commitment
to dissuade the temptations of the wandering mind and the

FROM STRESS TO REST

unrelenting distractions of thoughtful speculation. And to
do this, we must be actively in a state of ‘catch and release’,
to acknowledge attachments that pull us away from the
moment that is, and simply let go from the indulgence of
the imagination.
Learning to observe is a learned state of consciousness,
it is the capacity to become aware of the moment as it is
happening, without judgement or interjection. For some
this is a natural ability, and for others it is a state that needs
dedicated cultivation. To be the observer is to harness the
attention and disregard the intellectual mind. To observe
is to acknowledge the moment simply as it is, without the
filter or nuance of our past and personal experiences.
So how does one establish this state of observation,
a steady state of witnessing the moment without
interpretation? To establish the witness, is to tap back
into our deepest state of awareness, to disregard when
the thinking mind begins to distract and misguide our
attention. Now it may seem like a tall order to do so, but in
fact where the challenge lies is not in being in the moment,
but rather not allowing yourself to be tempted away from
it. And while this may seem like a subtle different, it is in
fact everything. Consider this, instead of thinking you
need to arrive somewhere with your attention, or find the
place where we are not distracted away from the moment,
see it as you are already there, but there are many things
pulling you away from where you already area. Sometimes
these distractions will be external like sounds, voices or
surrounding situations, and other times it will be internal

where the mind layers on thought, doubt, consideration or
intelligence. And in both situations, we must disengage with
this ambition and stay relentlessly in the experience only as
it is unfolding.
A meaningful technique to do this is to simply acknowledge
what you are noticing, rather than what you are
understanding. When we acknowledge, we are allowing
ourselves to be in an experience with a sense of newness
and wonderment, whereas if we are trying to understand,
we are implementing our intellect into our experiences
trying to make sense of them. Another technique that
will help is to focus on how an experience makes you feel,
instead of what you think of it. Put another way, focus on
the ‘what’ not the ‘why’.
For example, notice that being outside makes you feel
warm and refreshed, instead of ‘what is the temperature’,
or ‘why is it so warm at this time of the year?’. And so, we
can use the phrase ‘notice what you notice, and feel what
you feel’ as a reminder of how we can continually build and
sustain our observational qualities in our life and practice.
When we speak of techniques and practices, it all starts
with the witness, our ability to be self-aware in how we feel
in this moment. Our ability to tune into our true state of
feeling is the essential foundation to effective breathwork
and meditation practices. Without self-awareness, any
techniques can only support superficially, so as we learn to
guide these practices know that we must always begin with
offering the space to acknowledge and observe the state of
what is, and how that makes us feel.

WHAT DOES AWARENESS MEAN TO YOU?

27

JUST BREATHE

Education
Commitment to learning
Without techniques the world is a terrifying place to be.
If on a boat in the middle of the ocean, unable to steer
the rudder or raise the sails, we become victims to the
crashing waves and the harsh elements of the environment.
But, if we have knowledge and have learned techniques
taught to us by those who have more experience, we no
longer are pacifists in an unwanted or unrelenting moment.
In these moments we become the captain, rather than
the passenger and the experience becomes manageable,
or perhaps, even exciting. We are able to feel enlivened in
the moment (or shortly after) and in doing so, can create
a sense of certainty and understanding, even in situations
that are innately uncontrollable. And this becomes the
essential need to learn proper techniques, to study and
ask questions predicated on obtaining an intellectual
understanding so that we may be decisive and purposeful
in times of opportune practice.
And so together we will learn techniques and share
modalities of quiet practices. In doing so, we are
committed to educating you with diligence, care and
perspective. But in saying this, it is important to express

that the techniques and experiences we share are not
definitive, nothing rarely is, there will always be different
perspectives on how certain practices are learned,
experienced or shared. This is an innate aspect of working
with the human condition.
Education itself comes in two critical paths of learning;
intellectual and experiential. One is an endeavour of the
mind, often before in preparation of after in resolution.
Experiential learning is the path of learning by doing, a
feeling and a knowingness. Both had essential merit in how
we grow. Never lean on one so heavily that we negate the
other, for even though the two halves may never be equal in
measure, both are necessary for a truly impactful practice.
So as we go, we encourage you to learn this curriculum
thoroughly, especially during this time together, and take
it with you as a foundation for your onward education.
There is much here to understand and explore, but
always remember the act of learning is never ending and
a constant commitment we must make if we are to share
these quiet practices with others.

Experience
A valuable and meaningful moment
For a practice to be truly profound, it must be more than
just the execution of techniques, it must be a complete
experience for the those who are practicing. This does not
mean we must create an overt or extraordinary mood, nor
do we need to prescribe to a certain pattern or tonality
in our voice. It simply means we must be considerate of
the individual people and perspectives that are joining you
in practice. Creating an experience can be as simple as
taking into consideration the audience of your offering, the
positioning in which people are sitting or reclining. It can be
offering accompanying music as a way to lull our distracting
noises or recognising that silence will be the best advocate
for an inward experience.

Often when we are creating an experience to share, the
greatest dilution to the moment is an un-warranted sense
of urgency, the feeling that we must be doing something
or getting somewhere sooner or with more pertinence. Be
thoughtful in the words you share, the techniques offered
and when in doubt, speak less. Let the quietness of the
moment help to create the sacredness of experience.
Remember always that when you are not speaking, your
practitioners innate will return back to themselves deeply
and completely. Our job is simply create the experience to
guide them back to themselves.

‘Find a quiet corner,
make it sacred, visit it often.’
MICHAEL JAMES WONG
28

FROM STRESS TO REST

Finding a quiet corner
When practicing at home, create a space for your practice
to be sacred. This is a place you can visit daily and regularly
with minimal distractions and purposeful intent. For
some, you may want to create this space and adorn it with
comfort objects like throw pillows and blankets, for others
it may be preferred to keep things minimal. Certain objects
like a cushion to sit on, or a sturdy chair may be welcomed
additions if you are dealing with injury, limited range of
motion or other lifestyle considerations.

Having ‘a place’ is not an essential ingredient for practice,
most all practices can be done anywhere, with the only
significant consideration being personal safety. Assuming
you are in a place where you can safely close your eyes,
and you, and your belongings are in no danger, then
turning the volume down and inwards for a practice is
always available. Even surrounding sound, like music or
chatter from the room next door can be ‘tuned out’ when
proper techniques and commitment is practiced.

It is also important to recognise that you do not need to
create anything specific, simply recognising a space within
your home as your ‘practice spot’ is also good. Often one
end of the sofa, or a seat by the window, a room with a door
that closes is a great choice, because having a place to visit
daily allows habitual patterns to build while also removes
the need to ‘find’ or decide on a place each time.

But to have, or not to have, is not mutually exclusive.
The essence of turning our attention within is not based
on our surroundings, and so, having or not having a
regular place to sit cannot dilute the experience of
practice, but can only help to minimise distractions and
prepare the seat in which we can quiet down the mind
quiet down the mind and move inside.

EYE GAZING
AN EXERCISE IN AWARENESS

1.

Set a timer for 5 minutes

2.

Sit across from the person either crossed
legged on the floor or directly in front of them
in a chair

3.

Create a physical connect of the knees touching

4.

Start with the eyes closed and take 3-5
conscious breaths

5.

When ready to begin, slowly open the eyes and
create eye contact

6.

For the duration of the time; no closing the eyes,
no looking away, no talking

7.

At the end of the time, one person remains with
eyes closed, while other person shares their
experience with no feedback

8.

When they are done, switch roles and other
person shares. This allows real observations to
be shared without disruption or deflection

29

JUST BREATHE

Daily practice
for your mind
& mental health
For this process to be meaningful we must start always start within. Because
when we do, we are allowing granting ourselves the greatest learnings and insights
available, personal experience. These will always be your greatest teachings.
Throughout the course a daily practice will be asked, this will help to;
•

Establish a deep personal experience with meditation and breathwork

•

Start or strengthen your commitment to practice

•

Refine your personal practice techniques

•

Gain valuable understanding on daily behaviour

•

Increase your everyday well-being

•

Create invaluable insights you can share with others

Please track your practice and write a few notes on your daily reflections
and observations for personal insight.

A COMMITMENT TO YOURSELF

NAME

SIGNATURE

30

DATE

FROM STRESS TO REST

Daily practice journal
DAY

PRACTICE

OBSERVATIONS

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

31

JUST BREATHE

Daily practice journal
DAY

PRACTICE

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

32

OBSERVATIONS

FROM STRESS TO REST

Daily practice journal
DAY

PRACTICE

OBSERVATIONS

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

33

JUST BREATHE

‘Never measure the
first step in distance.’
MICHAEL JAMES WONG

34

FROM STRESS TO REST

Daily practice journal
DAY

PRACTICE

OBSERVATIONS

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

35

JUST BREATHE

Daily practice journal
DAY

PRACTICE

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

36

OBSERVATIONS

FROM STRESS TO REST

Daily practice journal
DAY

PRACTICE

OBSERVATIONS

51

52

53

54

55

56

57

58

59

60

37

JUST BREATHE

Daily practice journal
DAY

PRACTICE

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

38

OBSERVATIONS

FROM STRESS TO REST

Daily practice journal
DAY

PRACTICE

OBSERVATIONS

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

39

JUST BREATHE

Daily practice journal
DAY

PRACTICE

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

40

OBSERVATIONS

FROM STRESS TO REST

Daily practice journal
DAY

PRACTICE

OBSERVATIONS

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

100

41

JUST BREATHE

42

2

SUBSECTION TITLE

Breathwork
fundamentals
Using the breath to
facilitate systematic change

MODULE 1

Anatomy of the breath

MODULE 2

Functional breath awareness & mechanics of breathing

MODULE 3

Physiology, mechanic of breathing & respiratory system

MODULE 4

Systematic breathing techniques & nervous system

43

JUST BREATHE

The power
of the breath
In this chapter we will explore the power
of breathing practices and how we can
learn and share them with others. The
name breathwork itself is a general term
used for the various techniques and
modalities that are available to change
the natural pattern of the breath for a
specific experience or outcome. There
are many techniques to explore and a
range of categories in which we can both
learn and experience them.

When you have healthy lungs, breathing is natural and easy.
You breathe in and out with your diaphragm doing about
80 percent of the work to fill your lungs with a mixture
of oxygen and other gases, and then to send the waste
gas out. Over time, stale air builds up, leaving less room
for the diaphragm to contract and bring in fresh oxygen.
With the diaphragm not working to full capacity, the body
starts to use other muscles in the neck, back and chest
for breathing. This translates into lower oxygen levels, and
less reserve for exercise and activity. If practiced regularly,
breathing exercises can help rid the lungs of accumulated
stale air, increase oxygen levels and get the diaphragm to
return to its job of helping you breathe.
These days breathwork has become an increasingly
popular practice to help regulate the nervous system,
calm a busy mind and at times, energise the body into
action. Breathwork itself has origins and influences in both
traditional eastern practices as well as modern western
and scientific communities and within this course we will
aim to discuss it all.

44

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

What are the benefits
of breathwork?

Physically, breathwork brings oxygen into the body, it refills
our lungs, advocates for our respiratory system and helps
to regenerate our cells back to an optimum state. It has
core benefits when practiced:
•

An immediate sense of calm for when feeling stressed

•

Better sleep (easier time falling asleep and staying
asleep)

•

Improved focus (whether at home, at school, or
relaxing with family and friends)

•

Lower anxiety levels

•

Less muscle tension

•

Improved cardiovascular stamina and heart rate
variability

•

Improved blood pressure

•

Improved symptoms related to common breathing
conditions such as asthma

•

Improved digestion

•

Improved concentration

Understanding the breath
Breathing or ventilation is the process of moving air into
and from the lungs to facilitate gas exchange with
the internal environment, mostly to flush out carbon
dioxide and bring in oxygen.
All aerobic creatures need oxygen for cellular respiration,
which extracts energy from the reaction of oxygen with
molecules derived from food and produces carbon dioxide
as a waste product. Breathing, or “external respiration”,
brings air into the lungs where gas exchange takes place
in the alveoli through diffusion. The body’s circulatory
system transports these gases to and from the cells,
where “cellular respiration” takes place.
The breathing of all vertebrates with lungs consists of
repetitive cycles of inhalation and exhalation through a
highly branched system of tubes or airways which lead
from the nose to the alveoli. The number of respiratory
cycles per minute is the breathing or respiratory rate, and
is one of the four primary vital signs of life. Under normal
conditions the breathing depth and rate is automatically,
and unconsciously, controlled by several homoeostatic
mechanisms which keep the partial pressures of carbon
dioxide and oxygen in the arterial blood constant.
Breathing also has other important functions. It provides
a mechanism for speech, laughter and similar expressions
of the emotions. It is also used for reflexes such
as yawning, coughing and sneezing.

45

JUST BREATHE

Breathwork

Functional

Systematic

Experiential

NERVOUS SYSTEM RECOGNITION

NERVOUS SYSTEM REGULATION

NERVOUS SYSTEM RELEASE

Respiratory physiology

Self-sustainable techniques

Full body-mind connection

Stress management

Proactive essential practices

Hyper stimulation reduction

Guidance for responsive sequences

Conscious awareness
and expanded states

Breath variability

Manipulation of techniques,
ratio and rounds

Breath awareness

Recovery and safety protocol
Emotional release

Quality vs. quantity axis

Voluntary vs. involuntary

ABC123 VARIABLE
BREATHING TECHNIQUES

Non-ordinary states of consciousness

Diaphragmatic, costal, clavicular

Direct Response

Active and effortful hyperventilation

Active, passive, recovery

Gradual Response

HOW WE BREATHE

TRANSFORMATIONAL BREATHING

Nasal vs. mouth breathing
4-part breathing architecture
Anatomy of the breath
WHY WE BREATHE
Sympathetic /
parasympathetic divisions
Down regulation vs. up regulation

EXHALE & ESSENTIAL
DAILY PRACTICES

Conscious connected breathing

Incl: calming, soothing,
grounding, balancing

Somatic introspection

Down regulating, awakening,
energising, uplifting
Daily 5 & Gentle 10
movement exercises

Cardiovascular & lung health
NSRT METHOD FOR
PRACTICE GUIDANCE
Technical execution and combinations
Elements of supportive response
Key factors of facilitation

46

HOLOTROPIC BREATHING

Constant and continuous

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

Mouth vs. nose breathing
Your nose and mouth provide two ways to breathe. Both
lead to your throat, which carries oxygen into your lungs.
Even so, there are important differences between nose
breathing and mouth breathing.
Your mouth helps you eat, drink, and talk. You can also
use your mouth to breathe, but it doesn’t have many of
the unique features that your nose has for this purpose. In
some cases, mouth breathing is necessary. Yet, breathing
primarily through your mouth is associated with some
health risks. With mouth breathing, your mouth loses
moisture, which can cause dry mouth. It could also increase
your risk of; inhaling unfiltered air, allergic reactions
to allergens, asthma, bad breath, snoring and sleep apnoea.
You might need to breathe through your mouth if you have
nasal congestion, a deviated septum or have small nostrils.

Your nose is designed to help you breathe safely,
efficiently and properly. It can do this due to its ability to:
1. Filter out foreign particles
Nasal hair filters out dust, allergens, and pollen, which
helps prevent them from entering your lungs.
2. Humidify inhaled air
Your nose warms and moisturises the air you breathe
in. This brings the air you inhale to body temperature,
making it easier for your lungs to use.
3. Produce nitric oxide
During nasal breathing, your nose releases nitric oxide
(N²O) which a vasodilator, this means it helps to widen
blood vessels and help to improve oxygen circulation in
your body.

12 Benefits of nose vs. mouth breathing
1.

The inside of your nose is lined with tiny hairs called
cilia. The cilia filter, warm and humidify inhaled air.
They protect you against 20 billion particles of foreign
matter every day.

2.

Some people argue you need to mouth breathe to
bring in enough air during exercise. But research
proves the opposite. The extra resistance during nose
breathing results in 10 to 20% better oxygenation.

3.

Nose breathing is 22% more efficient than mouth
breathing. Which means breathing is much easier, and
the breathing muscles don’t get so tired.

4.

Nose breathing keeps your airways clear. Breathing in
through the nose and out through the mouth causes
nasal congestion and makes it harder to breathe. If
you’re wondering how to breathe with a stuffy nose,
the surprising answer is that you need to get used to
nose breathing.

5.

6.

The lungs draw oxygen from inhaled air during nasal
exhalation too. Nose breathing is slower, and nasal
exhalation creates a back-flow of air into the lungs. The
air stays in the lungs for longer, and the body has more
time to extract oxygen from that air.
The air hunger during nose breathing forces you to
slow down until your breath is properly trained. This
reduces stress and high blood pressure and it stops
you from over-training.

7.

Nose breathing harnesses nitric oxide (NO). Nitric
oxide is produced in the sinuses around the nose. It
protects against airborne viruses, bacteria, allergens,
and other pathogens. It opens the blood vessels in the
lungs, allowing better oxygen diffusion.

8.

When there is a proper balance of oxygen and carbon
dioxide (CO2) in the blood, the body maintains a
balanced pH. Most oxygen travels around the body in
red blood cells. CO2 is the catalyst that causes the red
blood cells to release this load of oxygen to the body.
If you breathe through an open mouth, you lose too
much CO2. So nose breathing enhances your body’s
ability to access the oxygen in your blood.

9.

Nose breathing during sleep makes sleep apnoea less
severe. Scientists found that during mouth breathing,
apneas increase, and oxygen desaturation is worse.

10. It is not possible to maintain diaphragm breathing
through the mouth. Nose breathing engages and
strengthens your diaphragm, which is an integral
muscle of the core and necessary for the stability of
your spine.
11.

During exercise, nose breathing can improve mental
focus and boost coronary artery blood flow.

12. Nose breathing reduces symptoms of exerciseinduced asthma because it protects the airways from
trauma and inflammation.

47

JUST BREATHE

How we breathe
Our lungs work hard. Even when you’re resting, they’re
diligently transporting oxygen into your bloodstream
and moving carbon dioxide out. They’re part of a serious
business run by an intricate structure of organs and
tissues—aka your respiratory system. To keep you alive
and breathing, your lungs are on the clock 24/7, 365 days
a year. Breathing 12 to 15 times a minute, translating to
17,000 breaths a day or more than 6 million breaths a year.
Your lungs are one of the largest organs in your body. The
surface area of both lungs is roughly the same size as a
tennis court and the total length of the airways running
through them is 1,500 miles. When you breathe in—either
through your nose or mouth—air moves from the throat
down to the windpipe and into two main bronchial tubes
that lead to each lung. These tubes then branch out into
smaller passages called bronchioles, which deliver the air
to small air sacs called alveoli. It’s here where fresh oxygen
from the air is exchanged for carbon dioxide in the blood.
You have two lungs, the left lung and the right lung. The left
lung is slightly smaller and has a notch to give room for the
heart. Each lung is divided into lobes—the left lung has two
and the right lung has three—which are similar to balloons
filled with sponge-like tissue. Each lobe receives air from
its own branch of the bronchial tree, but they all have the

48

same function: bringing oxygen into the bloodstream and
removing carbon dioxide.
When you inhale, your lungs expand to hold the incoming
air. How much air they hold is called lung capacity and
varies with a person’s size, age, gender and respiratory
health. The maximum amount of air an average adult male’s
lungs can hold is about six litres (that’s the same as about
three large soda bottles). There’s some math involved to
get to that number, but basically, it’s adding up air from a
normal breath, extra air you can force in, additional air you
can force out after regular exhaling and the air that’s left in
the lungs after all that.
Every day, you breathe in just over 2,000 gallons of air—
enough to almost fill up a normal-sized swimming pool.
That’s a lot of air. It’s the amount needed to oxygenate
approximately 2,000 gallons of blood pumped through
your heart daily. Because lungs are constantly exposed
to the external environment, they need some protection
from dust, germs and other unwanted matter. That’s
where mucus comes in. Your bronchial tubes are lined
with cilia (they’re like thin little hairs) that carry mucus up
into your throat to trap those yucky intruders until you
cough, sneeze, clear your throat or swallow to get rid
of them.

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

The diaphragm
The diaphragm is the primary muscle used in respiration,
which is the process of breathing. This dome-shaped
muscle is located just below the lungs and heart,
contracting continually as you breathe in and out.
The diaphragm is a thin skeletal muscle that sits at the
base of the chest and separates the abdomen from the
chest, it contracts and flattens when you inhale creating
a vacuum effect that pulls air into the lungs. When you
exhale, the diaphragm relaxes and the air is pushed out of
the lungs. The diaphragm also has some non-respiratory
functions as well, increasing abdominal pressure to help
the body get rid of vomit, urine, and faeces as well as
placing pressure on the oesophagus to prevent acid reflux.
The phrenic nerve, which runs from the neck to the
diaphragm, controls the movement of the diaphragm.

There are 3 large openings in the diaphragm that allow
certain structures to pass between the chest and
the abdomen;
1.

Oesophageal opening
The oesophagus and vagus nerve, which controls much
of the digestive system, pass through this opening.

2.

Aortic opening
The aorta, the body’s main artery that transports
blood from the heart, passes through the aortic
opening. The thoracic duct, a main vessel of the
lymphatic system, also passes through this opening.

3.

Caval opening
The inferior vena cava, a large vein that transports
blood to the heart, passes through this opening.

INSPIRATION

EXPIRATION

Thoracic cavity
expands

Thoracic cavity
reduces

External
intercostal
muscles contract

External
intercostal
muscles relax

Diaphragm

Diaphragm
contracts

Diaphragm
relaxes

49

JUST BREATHE

The anatomy of the breath
4 Parts of the breath
The breath itself has 4 distinct parts of how it functions:

1. The inhale

2. Retention of the inflated breath

The primary aspect of breathing is the inhalation
where the lungs actively inflate and draw the
oxygen into the body.

Once oxygen is inflated into the lungs there is
a process of sealing in the consumed air and
retaining the breath before exhalation, this
enables the lungs and diaphragm to ease while still
maintaining the benefits of the new oxygen intake.

3. The exhale

4. Retention of the exhaled breath

This is the process of expulsion of stale air and
converted CO2 where the lungs empty.

After the exhalation the lungs are deflated, but
not empty. A momentary pause, or retention of
the exhaled breath enables a point of muscular
disengagement and a cause for the diaphragm
to reset and momentarily relax.

3 Different ways to breathe
TYPE

WHAT IS IT?

WHY?

Diaphragmatic

Directing the breath towards the lower
abdomen, making the belly expand while the
chest stays relatively still

Helps relaxation, reducing effects of cortisol
and improving core stability

Thoracic

Directing the breath entirely into the ribcage,
making sure that the abdomen does not move
during inhale or exhale

Encourages the lungs to become fully inflated
to more effectively aerate the alveoli, also
frees the joints of the ribs, the upper back
and neck

Clavicular

Drawing air into the top third of the lungs by
both raising the shoulders and collarbones,
and contracting the abdomen during
inhalation

Typically clavicular breathing (shallow
breathing) is a stress response which can be
lessened by actively engaging diaphragmatic
breath patterns

50

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

3 Types of breath inertia

DID YOU KNOW?

1.

Active breathing
Active Breathing is the manipulation of the breath,
it’s should be purposeful, intentional with the aim to
increase the richness of the breath in either quality
or quantity. Active breathing is where Pranayama
techniques are used.

2.

Passive breathing
Passive Breathing is involuntary or natural breathing
of the body. It requires no effort and cannot be
controlled. It is the feeling that we are ‘being breathed’
instead of the actively manipulating the body. This is a
resting breath, one that is necessary to establish the
witness and instigate self-awareness.

3.

Recovery breathing
Recovery Breathing is a transitional breath used
to transition from an active breathing pattern to a
passive one. Often used intermittently throughout
the practice if the sensation or experience becomes
overwhelming or it is the technique used at the end
of the practice to return to a state of stillness and
awareness.

You don't breathe evenly through your nostrils
Did you know that you always have a dominant pathway? What’s even more
interesting is that the dominance changes constantly throughout the
day. ENT’s (Ear, Nose and Throat Specialist) have found that the oxygen
dominance will alternate naturally approximately every 90 minutes or so,
this is our body's way of ensuring equality ensuring neither nasal passage is
over used.
You cannot fully exhale
Did you know that you cannot fully exhale? The body is a marvellous being
and we cannot completely extinguish the breath of life within intentionally.
Within the body and breath it us said that there is always 10-18% of air
always remaining to ensure we can stay alive. This is called your title
reserve, and no matter how hard you may try to exhale, we will always have
some oxygen that will never leave us.
We can breathe paradoxically
Paradoxical breathing is the action of the chest and abdomen wall moving
inwards during inhalation, rather than expanding. This breathing pattern is
commonly seen during a short and sharp intake of air due to shock or cold,
or in someone experiencing considerable anxiety. It is said to stimulate the
sympathetic nervous system.

51

JUST BREATHE

The respiratory system

The respiratory system is the network of organs
and muscles that enable you to breathe. It governs the
absorption of oxygen from the air you breathe in, and the
removal of waste gases like carbon dioxide from your
blood stream.

Nasal cavity
Nostril
Oral cavity

Pharynx

Larynx
Trachea

Right main
bronchus

Left main
bronchus

Right lung

Left lung

Diaphragm

DID YOU KNOW?

52

Most of us use only 20-25% of our respiratory
capacity because we breathe from the top of our
chests. As our normal breathing pattern doesn’t use
the entire lungs, we aren’t getting the full physical
and mental benefits we could be achieving by
engaging in “conscious connected breathing”.

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

Airways

Lungs & blood vessels

Sinuses
Hollow spaces in the bones of your head above and below
your eyes that are connected to your nose by small
openings. Sinuses help regulate the temperature and
humidity of inhaled air.

Left lung
Your left lung is divided into two lobes.

Nose
The preferred entrance for outside air into the respiratory
system. The hairs lining the nose’s wall are part of the aircleaning system.
Mouth
Air also enters through the mouth, especially for those who
have a mouth-breathing habit, whose nasal passages may
be temporarily blocked by a cold, or during heavy exercise.
Throat
The throat collects incoming air from your nose and mouth
then passes it down to the windpipe (trachea).
Windpipe
The windpipe or trachea is the passage leading from your
throat to your lungs.
Bronchial tubes
The windpipe divides into the two main bronchial tubes,
one for each lung, which divides again into each lobe of
your lungs. These, in turn, split further into bronchioles.
Right lung
Your right lung is divided into three lobes, or sections.
Each lobe is like a balloon filled with sponge-like tissue.
Air moves in and out through one opening—a branch of
the bronchial tube.

Muscles & bones
Diaphragm
Your diaphragm is the strong wall of muscle that separates
your chest cavity from the abdominal cavity. By moving
downward, it creates suction in the chest, drawing in air and
expanding the lungs.

The pleura
The two membranes, actually, one continuous one folded
on itself, that surround each lobe of the lungs and separate
your lungs from your chest wall.
Cilia and mucus
Your bronchial tubes are lined with cilia, these are like very
small hair like structures that move like waves. This motion
carries mucus (sticky phlegm or liquid) upward and out into
your throat, where it is either coughed up or swallowed.
Mucus catches and holds much of the dust, germs, and
other unwanted matter that has invaded your lungs. You get
rid of this matter when you cough, sneeze, clear your throat
or swallow.
Bronchioles
The smallest branches of the bronchial tubes are
called bronchioles, at the end of which are the air sacs or
alveoli.
Alveoli
The very small air sacs where the exchange of oxygen and
carbon dioxide takes place.
Capillaries and the pulmonary vein
The blood vessels in the walls of the alveoli. Blood passes
through the capillaries, entering through your pulmonary
artery and leaving via your pulmonary vein. While in the
capillaries, blood gives off carbon dioxide through the
capillary wall into the alveoli and takes up oxygen from air in
the alveoli.
Muscles and bones
Your diaphragm is the strong wall of muscle that separates
your chest cavity from the abdominal cavity. By moving
downward, it creates suction in the chest, drawing in air and
expanding the lungs.
Ribs are bones that support and protect your chest cavity.
They move slightly to help your lungs expand and contract.
Vessels and help to improve oxygen circulation in your body.

Ribs
The bones that support and protect your chest cavity.
They move slightly to help your lungs expand and contract.

53

JUST BREATHE

The nervous system
The nervous system is a super complex network in the
human body that controls movement and balance, our
senses (sight, hearing, taste, smell, and touch), our thought
processes, and our state of being conscious and awake.
It includes the brain, the spinal cord, and all the nerves
in the body, with the primary function of maintaining
homoeostasis (balanced state of chemical, physical and

internal conditions), receiving sensory input, integrating
information, controlling muscles and glands, and
establishing and maintaining mental activity. In order for
the nervous system to operate, we have specialized cells
called neurons that send electrical impulses to organs,
muscles and glands, and act as the communicating signals
between the CNS, the PNS and other cells in the body.

Nervous system
CNS (Central
Nervous System)

PNS (Peripheral
Nervous System)

STRUCTURE

STRUCTURE

Consists of the brain and spinal cord

Cranial nerves and spinal nerves
coming out of the spinal cord

FUNCTION
The control centre that receives information

FUNCTION
The sensory division that send
information to the CNS and the
motor division receives information
from the CNS to muscles and
glands. The motor division has two
subdivisions called the somatic
nervous system (voluntary) and
the automatic nervous system
(involuntary) and maintaining
homoeostasis

from the PNS, establishing mental activity and
maintaining homoeostasis

Sensory division (afferent)
Towards the CNS

Motor division (efferent)
Away from the CNS

Somatic nervous system
Voluntary; Skeletal Muscles

Autonomic nervous system
Involuntary; cardiac muscles,
smooth muscles, glands

54

Sympathetic division

Enteric division

Fight or flight response

Digestion

Parasympathetic division
Rest and digest response

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

The spinal column and nerves
We have 31 pairs of spinal nerves that originate from the
spinal cord, stretching out in-between the vertebrae
on each side of the spinal column, and 12 pairs of cranial
nerves that originate from the brain.
There are 8 cervical nerves that are the spinal nerves from
the cervical segments C1-C7 of the spinal cord, numbered
C1-C8, where C1–C7 emerge above their corresponding
vertebrae, while C8 emerges below the C7 vertebra.
There are 12 spinal thoracic nerves that are spinal nerves
from the thoracic segments T1-T12 where each nerve
originates from their corresponding thoracic vertebrae,
the 5 lumbar nerves are spinal nerves emerging from the

lumbar vertebrae, numbered L1-L5 as their corresponding
vertebral segments, and the 5 sacral nerves are spinal
nerves passing through the left and right sides of the
sacrum. The cervical nerves innervate the muscles
of the head and neck, and upper limbs, the thoracic
nerves innervate the thorax, and the lumbar and sacral
(lumbosacral) nerves innervate the lower limbs.
When a spinal nerve is constricted or damaged due to
peripheral impingement or nerve root compression, the
muscles innervated will be affected and symptoms might
include pain, loss of sensation, loss of motor function, loss
of power and potentially atrophy.

Cerebrum
(brain)

Parasympathicus
Constricts pupils

Increases saliva production

Spinal chord

Sympathetic chain

Symathicus
Dilates pupils
Inhibits saliva production

Reduces heart rate

Dilates bronchia

Constricts bronchia

Rises heart rate
Stimulates activity
of the digestive organs

Inhibits activity of
digestive organs

Stimulates activity
of the pancreas

Inhibits activity
of the pancreas

Stimulates the gall bladder
Synapse

Inhibits activity
of the gall bladder
Stimulates the adrenal
medulla to release adrenaline
and noradrenaline

Constricts urinary bladder
Stimulates erection of
genitals of man and woman

Relaxes urinary bladder
Stimulates orgasm in genitals
of man and woman

55

JUST BREATHE

The 10
steps of a
breathwork
practice

56

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

1. Opening invitation

6. NSRT breathing technique(s)

Offer an intentional transition into a quiet
moment. Use the mantra to invite the attention
inwards. Close your eyes, be still, just breathe.

Begin your techniques and use them intentionally
to regulate the nervous system and balance the
breath. ABC123 techniques are used here to
respond to different need states.
Today’s practice is…

2. Stillness

7. Conscious breath to close

Always begin with stillness in body and mind.
Ensure you are in a comfortable and settled
space, remove any distractions or temptations.
Give yourself time to arrive. This is a moment of
deep rest.
Sit, settle, stillness.

As the technical practice comes to an end, use the
conscious breath (sometimes called the recovery
breath) as a point of closure and/or transition. An
even, full or sighing release will help to return the
breath to it’s natural pattern.
Let’s take one last breath together.

3. Cultivate awareness

8. Cultivate awareness

Begin to become aware of the moment as it is.
Do not rush to move into techniques, be here
completely.
Notice what you notice, and feel what you feel.

Return to the witness and observation state.
Recognise the state of your experience and how
you feel. Do not judge the sensations or try to
qualify their value here, instead just simply notice
again how you feel in this moment here.
How do you feel now?

4. Observe the breath

9. Stillness

Become aware of the natural state of your breath,
do not feel tempted to change or alter it. There is
great power in simply noticing it as it is, this is
your baseline.
Observe the quantity and quality axis.

Close your practice by returning to the state of
deep rest and stillness. Give time for the mind and
body to simply be at ease completely. Never rush
to return to your surrounding environment, rather
take time to come back gently.
Give yourself this moment to rest.

5. Conscious breath to begin

10. 3 Gratitudes

Before you begin to change the breath, take a
conscious breath as a signal of new beginnings.
This breath is full and deep, and can be an even
breath or a sigh, whatever supports the
moment of initiation.
Take the biggest breath you’ve taken all day.

Close your practice by sealing in the experience
with stillness and gratitude. Offer the ritual
closing to acknowledge yourself, your support
and this moment. Allow each moment to be one
of sacred endeavour.
Let’s close this practice with three breaths
together.

57

JUST BREATHE

‘True presence is the
gift the ego cannot steal.’
MICHAEL JAMES WONG

58

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

An incredibly comfortable seat
When finding the right seat for practice know that there
is not a one-size-fits-all seat. As ‘householders’ living in a
modern era, the ease and ability to sit on the floor crossed
legged is not always the best or recommended suggestion.
Finding a comfortable seat simply means putting the
physical body in a position where you can sit and be still.
Ideally when seated, the body sensations move into the
background and don’t create discomforts that continually
bring your physical position into the central priority of your
attention.
There are a many ways you can choose to sit, most
commonly in a chair, a sofa on a supported cushion.
Even more, finding a comfortable seat with structured
back support only helps to settle the body, and in doing
so, enables the seat itself to move into the background.
The use of certain props and cushions can be helpful to
rest the arms, or provide a structured seat beneath you
to create a stable foundation for your seat.

Sit

The act of stillness is not a finite and immediate
action or response, instead it is a gradual process of
changing and intentional circumstances. When coming
into stillness our first action is to sit and create the
conditions in which the body can be at rest. When we
sit, we are physically signalling to the body that we are
committing towards a state of stillness.

Settle

Once we are in a seated place, the second stage is
the act of settling, or allowing the residue energy
or movement in the body to reside and recess. The
majority of the body is composed of water, which
means that if go from movement into in-action,
there will always be a necessary state of allowing the
movement and ripples to subside. This is a process
nothing more than time and commitment.

Stillness

The final stage is stillness, the becoming or destination
of our intention. Stillness is not only a place of being,
but a continuous place of commitment to stay. Our
human disposition is of sensations and sensory actions,
so being in a state of stillness is an action intention,
attention and constant committed connection.

59

JUST BREATHE

Finding your seat
There are three primary ways to sit in practice.
Traditionally, the seat is cross legged on the floor or in a
straddle position on your lap, but for western and modern
body types, sitting on a chair, soft seat or structured way
is also appropriate. Regardless the position of seat, the
body should be physical comfortable, structured and at
manageable ease.

For some practices, a reclined or supported seat or a full
resting position is preferable or recommended (note that
some techniques and practices require certain seats of
practice). Explore your seat and find the one that suits
you well.

1. Seated
A seated position is traditionally a cross-legged
seat. This is an upright positioning of the body
but is recommended to be supported with props,
modifications or supported against the wall.
A seated practice should only be free-standing if the
techniques require an effortful or energising practice.

2. Supported
A supported seat is propped position for the body that
is a supported supine position of the body up too 45%.
A supported seat would need ample structure behind
the spine to ensure the body is not carrying effort, the
head and neck should be supported completely.

3. Straddled
A straddle seat is used as a modification for people
who prefer a ‘closed’ position of the body. This can
be because of muscular or physical discomfort when
sitting in a traditional seat, or this can be a position that
feels safer for the practitioner. A straddle seat is best
used with props to support.

60

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

‘A butterfly only
lands on quiet hands.’
MICHAEL JAMES WONG

61

JUST BREATHE

Functional
breathing &
systematic
breathwork
techniques
In this section we’ll look at the specific techniques
and benefits of different breathing practices.
Read through thoroughly to understand and take
time to understand both in theory and application.

62

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

Functional breathing
& breath awareness
•

Conscious Breathe

•

Recovery Breathe

•

Diaphragmatic Breathing

•

Costal Breath or Chest Breathing

•

Clavicular Breath or Upper Chest Breathing

•

Even Breath

•

360 Breathing

•

Coherent Breath

•

365 Method

Balanced breathing techniques
•

Box breathing

•

Inspired pause

•

Alternate nostril

•

3-Part inhale - exhale

Down regulation techniques
•

Physiological sigh

•

Extended exhale

•

Triangle breathing

•

Energising breath

•

Triangle 4-7-8

•

Cleansing and clearing

3 Part breathing
(belly/chest/exhale)

•

Bellows breath

•

Lions breathe

•

Pinhole breath

•

3 Part interrupted inhale

•

Humming breath

•

•

3 Part interrupted exhale

Circular nostril breathing
(warming and energising)

•

Circular nostril breathing
(cooling & calming)

•

Opposite alternate nostril breathing (inhale)

•

Elephant breath

•

Cooling breath (variation 1)

•

Breath of joy

•

Cooling breath (variation 2)

•

Squatted belly

•

Opposite alternate nostril breathing
(exhale)

•

Horse stance

•

Up regulation techniques

63

JUST BREATHE

Functional breathing
& breath awareness

64

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

Conscious breath
A conscious breath is a slow considered breath to bring
awareness into the body. A conscious breath is not
dictated by quantity, but rather of a quality inhale and
exhale to signal a focus and intention of the moment. Use
this breath when beginning a practice or as a way to centre
or reset into a state of complete awareness in the moment.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Sitting or standing, bring your attention completely
onto the breath
Take a conscious breath in (does not need to be deep)
Exhale the breath out at ease (mouth open or close)
Repeat as needed
Repeat this for 10 rounds or 60 seconds

Recovery breath
This technique is a variation of the conscious breath
used intentionally after a breathing round. The recovery
breath, or return to natural breath is to ensure that when
a practice round completes, we are not simply stopping,
but rather, transitioning ourselves intentionally back to a
natural breath.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

At the completion of the last breath in the round,
take a full inhale in
Hold the breath and pause to acknowledge the
transition
Exhale fully with an extended breath helping to
initiate a down regulation
The exhale can be mouth closed or open
Allow breathing pattern to return to a natural
breath pace and flow

65

JUST BREATHE

Diaphragmatic breathing
Diaphragmatic breathing, also known as belly breathing is
a deep breathing exercise that fully engages the diaphragm
and increases the efficiency of the lungs.
This is a foundational technique for helping to regulate the
nervous system and create a parasympathetic response.
Belly breathing can be used pro actively to create a calming
effect, and as a response in times of heightened stress or
anxiousness.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Find a comfortable seat or symmetrical
standing position
Notice the current pace of the breath,
regardless the state
Take a conscious breath to begin
Place one hand on the belly, and one hand on the chest
Breathe slowly and fully into the belly, letting it expand
Pause at the top of the breath for 1 second
Exhale slowly letting the belly the empty
Repeat this for 10 rounds or 60 seconds

Costal breath or chest breathing
Costal breathing is a mode of breathing that
requires contraction of the intercostal muscles.
As the intercostal muscles relax, air passively
leaves the lungs. This type of breathing is also
known as shallow breathing.
HOW TO:

66

1.

Find a comfortable seat or symmetrical
standing position

2.

Notice the current pace of the breath,
regardless the state

3.

Take a conscious breath to begin

4.

Breathe slowly into the chest feeling the
expansion of the intercostal muscles

5.

Exhale slowly letting the chest empty

6.

Repeat to 10 rounds or 60 seconds

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

Clavicular breath or
upper chest breathing
Clavicular breathing relies on the muscles of the chest,
shoulders, upper back, and neck to elevate the upper rib
cage and chest for each inhalation. This causes the upper
chest and lungs to expand, resulting in inhalation.
HOW TO:
1.

Start by noticing the natural state of the breath

2.

Breathe into the upper chest and lower throat space

3.

Feel an 360 expansion, rather than an up and down
action

4.

Repeat to 10 rounds or 60 seconds

Even breath
The steady inhalation and exhalation of equal duration.
A straightforward practice that helps to soothe both body
and mind. A technique to help slow down the breathing
cycle and down regulate the nervous system. Evening
breathing is a comprehensive baseline for all techniques.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.

Find a comfortable seat
Notice the current pace of the breath, regardless the
state
Take a conscious breath to begin
Breathe in slowly for the count of 4 seconds or
slow counting
Take a natural pause at the top of the inhale for
approximately 1 second
Exhale to the count of 4 seconds or slow counting
Repeat this for 30 rounds or 2 minutes
If a 4 count patterns feels too short, long or not
supportive increase or decrease to a count that
creates calm and ease
Once completed, release the technique and return to
a natural breathing pattern

67

JUST BREATHE

360 Breathing
This circumferential technique is a focused variation of
belly/chest breathing that emphasises full torso breath
capacity. Use 360 degree breathing to encourage a full
breath and oxygen distribution and even inflation of rib
cage expansion.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Find a comfortable seat
Place one hand on the belly and one hand on the chest
Breathe slowly and fully into both belly and chest
equally, feeling both hands rise and expand
Focus on expanding evening in a 360 degree direction
Pause at the top of the breath for 1 second
Exhale slowly letting the belly and chest empty
Repeat this for 10 rounds or 60 seconds

Coherent breath
Coherent breathing is to breath at a rate of 5.5 breaths
per minute, which generally translates into inhaling and
exhaling to the count of 5.5 seconds. The purpose of this
type of breathing is to increase heart rate variability.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.

68

Inhale into your belly for five seconds
Exhale for another five seconds
Repeat for three to five minutes. Please mind the
following: Avoid breathing like a robot, or like you’re
scuba diving - breathe naturally as you usually do, just
slower

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

365 Method
365 Method is a common technique often recommended
by clinical professionals to counter accumulated stress.
This method is a recommendation to breathe and practice
repeat all 365 days of the year.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Using coherent breathing
Breathing practices three times a day
Breathing six times per minute
(inhale for 5, exhale for 5)
Repeat for five minutes

‘A hurried mind will choose
the fewest steps, a patient
one will enjoy many.’
MICHAEL JAMES WONG

69

JUST BREATHE

Balanced breathing
techniques

70

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

Box breathing
A breathing technique in which all four parts of the
breath (inhalation, internal retention, exhalation, external
retention) are all of equal length. Reduces physical stress
symptoms and increased mental clarity.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.

Find a comfortable seat
Notice the current pace of the breath,regardless
the state
Take a conscious breath to begin
Breathe in slowly for the count of 4 seconds or slow
counting
Hold the breath at the top of the inhale for the
count of 4
Exhale slowly to the count of 4
Repeat this for 30 rounds or 2 minutes
If a 4 count patterns feels too short, long or not
supportive increase or decrease to a count that
creates calm and ease
Once completed release the technique and return
to a natural breathing pattern

Inspired pause
This breathing technique focuses on slowing the oxygen
intake and exhalation. Too often when we breath we think
value comes only from what we are doing, when there is
significant value in moments when we are not breathing in
or out. A significant and intentional pause aims to create a
sense of non-physical ease, slow the heart rate down and
expand the lung capacity.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Find a comfortable seat
Take a conscious breath to begin
Breathe in slowly filling the breath to a comfortable
and manageable level
Without force, pause the breath without distinct
muscular engagement
Hold for the count of 2 seconds or slow counting
Exhale gently
Increase/decrease pause/hold count as preferred

71

JUST BREATHE

Alternative nostril breathing
Breath practice in which each nostril is alternately used
for inhalation and exhalation. Calms nervous system,
balances masculine and feminine energy, balances left and
right hemisphere of the brain, fosters mental clarity and
cultivates ability to concentrate.
HOW TO:
1.

Find a comfortable seat

2.

Take your right hand and lift up to your nose

3.

Cover your right nostril with your thumb and take a
long slow inhale through your left nostril

4.

Use your right ring finger to close off your left nostril at
the same time releasing the right

5.

Exhale through your right nostril, pause briefly at the
end of the exhale, then inhale again through the right
nostril

6.

Close off your right nostril, open your left and exhale
through the left

7.

This is one round, complete for several rounds of
breath

3-Part interrupted inhale & exhale
Brief pauses are taken during the inhale and exhale.
This technique helps slow down the breath and helps
create a sense of calm and ease.
HOW TO:
1.

Find a comfortable seat or reclined position

2.

Take a few clearing breaths

3.

On the next inhale, fill the lungs to just one third of
their capacity

4.

Take a short pause

5.

Fill the next third

6.

Take a short pause

7.

Fill the final third, or until the lungs are full with air

8.

Take a short pause at the top

9.

Exhale one third of the breath

10. Take a short pause
11.

Exhale the next third

12. Take a short pause
13. Exhale the final third, or until the lungs are empty of air
14. Take a final short pause
15. Repeat for a few rounds

72

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

‘In time, simplicity is
an inevitable result.’
MICHAEL JAMES WONG

73

JUST BREATHE

Down regulation
techniques

74

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

Physiological sigh
The physiological sigh, or often called the cyclic sigh
(when done in succession) is simple and effective down
regulating, stress response breath.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Start by noticing the current state your breath
quality
Take a full inhale through the nose
Take second inhale through the nose, at a lower
capacity but filling the intake to maximum capacity
Pause at the top
Open the mouth and sigh with an extended exhale
Repeat 5-10 times

Extended exhale
This breathing pattern is a release technique to help
quickly down regulate the nervous system and activate the
parasympathetic nervous system. It is a slow controlled
technique where the exhale is longer than the inhale and
no breath-holding in between. This technique is helps with
relaxation and tension decompression.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Breathe slowly to an comfortably full level
No pause needed
Exhale long, slow and deep with the mouth open
and an audible sigh
Repeat as needed

75

JUST BREATHE

Triangle breathing
A three part technique that helps slow down the breathing
cycle and down regulate the nervous system. Triangle
breathing focuses evenly on the inhale, pause at the top of
the breath and the exhale. This pattern is known to help
with stress and anxiousness.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.

Find a comfortable seat
Notice the current pace of the breath,
regardless the state
Take a conscious breath to begin
Breathe in slowly for the count of 3 seconds
or slow counting
Pause at the top of the inhale for 3 seconds
or slow counting
Exhale slowly for the count of 3 seconds or slow
counting
Repeat this for 10-12 rounds or 2 minutes
If a 3 count patterns feels too short/long or not
supportive, increase or decrease to a count that
creates calm and ease
Once completed, release the technique and
return to a natural breathing pattern

4 - 7- 8 Breathing
Triangle Breathing Variation
This technique is an inverted variation of the triangle
breathing technique, it was developed by an internationally
renowned doctor and integrative medicine pioneer,
Dr. Andrew Weil, and according to Weil, it is the most
effective way of managing anxiety and quelling errant
stress responses. These breathing ratio is useful for
combating anxiety because they help fortify the connection
between mind and body. As you slow your breathing
and focus fully on the breaths, you’re taking, and your
parasympathetic nervous system becomes engaged.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

76

Use the triangle breathing technique above as the
foundation
Inhale for the count of 4 seconds or slow counting
Pause and hold the breath for the count of 7 seconds
or slow counting
Exhale for the count of 8 seconds or slow counting
Repeat this for 10-12 rounds or 2 minutes

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

3 Part breathing
A breathing technique for deep breathing that
increasing oxygen intake and a full body sense of
calmness. This technique helps to create both internal
movement of the breath while a sense of warming within
the body. Belly/chest breathing can be used effectively
to calm the nerves or awaken the senses.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Find a comfortable seat
Notice the current pace of the breath, regardless
the state
Take a conscious breath to begin
Place one hand on the belly and one hand on the
chest
Breathe slowly and fully into both belly and chest
equally, feeling both hands rise and expand
Pause at the top of the breath for 1 second
Exhale slowly letting the belly and chest empty
Repeat this for 10 rounds or 60 seconds

Pinhole breath
The pinhole breath is a technique that is effectively used
to slow down the exhalation, down regulate the nervous
system and reduce real time stress.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Find a comfortable seat
Notice the breath without changing it
Take a full inhale through the nose
Part your lips slightly
Exhale out slowly through your lips like exhaling
through a small pinhole
Pause at the end of the breath
Repeat 10 times or 60 seconds

77

JUST BREATHE

Low frequency humming breath
A gentle humming down regulation technique. The
vibrations from this breathing technique are known
to soothe the nervous system and to free the mind of
agitation.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Gently place the thumbs over each tragus, applying
gentle pressure
Allow the rest of your fingers to rest naturally along
your forehead
With mouth closed take a slow breath in to full capacity
As you exhale slowly create a gentle humming sound
Repeat as needed

3-Part interrupted exhale
Brief pauses are taken during the exhale. Introduces
concept of lengthening the exhale to understand the true
capacity of the lungs.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.

Find a comfortable seat or reclined position
Take a few clearing breaths
Take a full inhale filling the lungs to a comfortable
capacity
4. Exhale one third of the breath
5. Take a short pause
6. Exhale the next third
7. Take a short pause
8. Exhale the final third, or until the lungs are empty of air
9. Take a final short pause
10. Inhale fully

78

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

Circular nostril breathing
(cooling & calming)

L
L

Breathing practice in which we inhale only through the left
nostril and exhale through the right. Encourages flow of
breath through the respiratory system creating a cooling
energy within the body and calming energy for the mind.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

R

Find a comfortable seat
Lift your right hand to the nose
Use your thumb to close off your right nostril and
breath in through your left nostril
Close the left nostril with your ring finger, releasing
right nostril and exhale through the right nostril
Continue in this way, inhaling through the left nostril
and exhaling through the right for 1-3 minutes

R

Cooling breath (variation 1)
This breathing practice requires the participant to be able
to curl their tongue like a straw in order to draw the breath
across the tongue. This cools the body, improves focus and
reduces agitation, anger and anxiety.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.
6.
7.

Find a comfortable seat
Take a few neutral breaths
With mouth open curl the tongue length ways to
create
a straw shape
Gently inhale washing the breath across the tongue
At the end of the inhalation relax the tongue and close
the mouth
Exhale through your nose
Repeat for 10-12 rounds noticing the cooling effect on
the body

79

JUST BREATHE

Cooling breath (variation 2)
This is another cooling breathing practice for those who
are not able to curl their tongue (don’t worry, it’s genetic!)
Rather than curling the tongue, the tongue is instead
pressed against the back of the top teeth.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.
6.
7.

Find a comfortable seat
Take a few neutral breaths
Bring the teeth together, keeping the lips open and
pressing the tip of the tongue to the back of the
top teeth
Gently inhale, creating a soft hissing sound as the air
moves in through the gaps in the teeth
At the end of inhalation release the teeth and tongue
and close the lips
Exhale through your nose
Repeat 10-12 times, noticing the cooling effect on
the body

Opposite alternate nostril breathing
(exhale)
A breathing technique in which the participant inhales
through both nostrils, and then alternates the exhale
through left and right. Helps to promote patience,
focus and control as well as relieving stress and
anxiety.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

L &R

80

R

L&R

L

Find a comfortable seat
Lift your right hand to the nose
Take an inhale through both nostrils
Use the ring finger to close off the left nostril and
exhale only through the right
Release the seal and inhale again through both
nostrils
Now close the right nostril with your thumb and
exhale only through your left
This is one round, continue for 10 rounds

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

‘A moment of gratitude
is always time well spent.’
MICHAEL JAMES WONG

81

JUST BREATHE

Up regulation
techniques

82

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

Energising breath
This practice invites the participant to constrict the
epiglottis in order to wash the breath across the back
of the throat, helping to regulate the breath, warms and
energise the body and calm the mind.
HOW TO:
1.

2.
3.
4.

5.
6.

7.

Hold your palm in front of your mouth and breath air
out in the same way that you would if you were fogging
up a mirror, creating a gentle washing sound. Notice
the activation at the back of your throat
Keep your hand where it is and inhale making the same
sound
Practice for a few rounds
Now, begin to use this same activation of the throat
but seal your lips on the exhale and breath out through
your nose
Practice for a few rounds
Now, close your mouth and breath in and out through
the
nose so that the sound of the breath is the same on
the inhale and exhale
Practice for one minute and release

Cleansing and clearing
A breathing technique in which the exhalation is active and
the inhalation is passive. Creating heat in the body and
strengthening the abdomen, as well as aiding digestion and
clearing the nadis.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.

Find a comfortable seat
Bring your awareness to you lower belly
Take a long breath in through your nose
Contract the muscles in the abdomen in quick but
regulated succession to force out short exhalations;
the inhalation will be a passive reaction to your
active exhalation
Continue this active exhalation for one minute
Inhale deeply through the nostrils and exhale slowly
through the mouth

83

JUST BREATHE

Bellows breath
A breathing technique in which both the inhalation
and exhalation come from active contractions of the
abdominals and diaphragm. Helping to strengthen the
abdomen, drain excess mucus from the lungs, and energise
both the body and mind.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.

Find a comfortable seat
Take a long breath in and out through the nose
Take another long breath in and exhale by quickly
contracting the abdominal muscles
Follow this with a quick diaphragmatic inhale so
that the breath moves into and out of the lungs in
quick succession
Continue for one minute
When you have finished take a long slow breath in
through the nose and out through the mouth

Lion’s breath
Lion’s Breath is a technique to clear stale air in the body
and stimulate the senses. Used in practice to immediate
de-stimulate and reduce stress in the body.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.

84

Lean the upper body forward slightly
Inhale through your nose with your mouth closed.
Open your mouth wide and stick out your tongue as
much as you can, curling it down toward your chin.
Exhale forcefully with a “ha” sound, feeling the breath
come from deep within and passing across your
entire tongue.
Repeat 5-10 times

BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

3-Part interrupted inhale
Brief pauses are taken during the inhale. The practice
introduces the concept of expanding the length and
capacity of the inhalation.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Find a comfortable seat or reclined position
Take a few clearing breaths
On the next inhale fill the lungs to just one third of their
capacity
Take a short pause
Fill the next third
Take a short pause
Fill the final third, or until the lungs are full with air
Take a final short pause
Exhale fully

Circular nostril breathing
(warming and energising)

R
R

Breathing practice in which we inhale only through the
right nostril and exhale through the left. Encourages flow of
breath through the respiratory system creating heat and
energy within the body. Strengthens energy, willpower
and enthusiasm.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.

L
L

5.

Find a comfortable seat
Lift your right hand to the nose
Use your ring finger to close off your left nostril and
breath in through your right nostril
Close the right nostril with your thumb, releasing left
nostril and exhale through the left nostril
Continue in this way, inhaling through the right nostril
and exhaling through the left for 1-3 minutes

85

JUST BREATHE

Opposite alternate nostril breathing
(inhale)
A breathing technique in which the participant inhales
through alternating nostrils whilst exhaling through both.
Helps to calm and focus the mind, as well as an aid to
balance emotions.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

L

L &R

R

Find a comfortable seat
Lift your right hand to the nose
Use your thumb to seal off your right nostril and breath
in through your left nostril
Release the seal and exhale through both nostrils
Seal your left nostril using your ring finger and inhale
through your right nostril
Release the seal and exhale again through both
This is one round, continue for 10 rounds

L &R

Elephant breath
This breathing practice is a dynamic and invigorating
technique to stimulate and energise the body. This
technique helps to increases oxygen levels in the
bloodstream, temporarily stimulating the sympathetic
nervous system, circulating more blood flow, and gently
heating the physical body.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

86

Stand with your feet shoulder width apart, knees
slightly bent
Inhale quickly through your nose as you swing your
arms forward and up overhead
Exhale quickly through your nose as you bend your
knees and fold forward, keep your arms heavy
Repeat for a few rounds
Pause in stillness and come back to your
natural breath

BREATHWORK
BREATHWORK FUNDAMENTALS

Breath of joy
Breath of Joy is a dynamic breathing technique designed to
invigorate the body and uplift the sensation response in the
body. In this practice, deep inhalations are accompanied by
vigorous arm movements, followed by a forceful exhalation
through the mouth. This rhythmic breathing pattern floods
the body with oxygen, awakening the senses and energizing
the mind. It releases tension, enhances circulation, and
promotes mental clarity.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.

Stand with your feet shoulder width apart, knees
slightly bent
Inhale one third of the breath through your nose as you
swing your arms forward and up overhead
Inhale the next third of the breath through your nose
as you swing your arms out to the side
Inhale to full capacity through your nose as you swing
your arms forward and up overhead
Take a big exhale through your mouth to the sound
of ‘ha’ as you bend your knees and fold forward, arms
move back
Repeat for a few rounds

Horse stance breathing
Stand with the legs spread and the knees bent. Place one
hand resting on each knee while leaning forward allowing
the abdomen to drop/hang forward. This body position
allows easy access to the abdomen engagement without
restriction. This position is best used cleansing and
clearing breaths and other energising breathing practices.
HOW TO:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Stand with legs spread and knees bent
Place one hand resting on each knee while
leaning forward
Allow the abdomen to drop/hang forward
Utilise a cleansing and clearing breath (P83) you can
also try this with other energising breathing practices

87

JUST BREATHE

88

3

SUBSECTION TITLE

Meditation
modalities
Understanding the
3 depths of the mind

MODULE 5

The Thinking Mind; Intro to Meditation

MODULE 6

Un-Doing the Mind; Established in Being

MODULE 7

Observations of the Mind; Present Moment Awareness

MODULE 8

Attention of the Mind; Focused Intention

89

JUST BREATHE

Quietening
the mind

The earliest records of meditation
practice date from approximately 1500
years BCE. It seems to have been an
integral part of the earliest forms of the
Vedic, or early Hindu, schools in India. In
the 6th to 4th centuries BCE, the Chinese
Taoist and Indian Buddhist traditions
began to develop their own versions
of meditation practice. Further west,
early forms of meditation practice were
developed by such notable figures as Philo
of Alexandria, the Desert Fathers of the
Middle East,and Saint Augustine.

90

The English word “meditation” stems from meditatum, a
Latin term meaning “to ponder.” Although we can’t know
when, exactly, people began to meditate, experts agree
that the practice probably began many thousands of years
ago, before the birth of modern civilization. When scholars
look to establish the origins of meditation, they first have
to decipher ancient texts and recorded hieroglyphs to
find references to this discipline. Several archaeological
findings suggest that hunter-gatherers were practitioners
of some forms of meditation, as were early shamans. Their
knowledge was passed down orally from one generation to
the next, helping to lay the crucial foundations of modern
meditation.

MEDITATION MODALITIES

The origins of meditation
It can be difficult to pin down the origins of meditation
because there are so many practices that fall under the
“meditation” umbrella. Is it mindfulness? Contemplation?
Communion? Chanting? Trance?
The practice of meditation has origins in the
ancient Vedic times of India and is described in
the Vedic texts. Meditation is one of the modalities
used in Ayurveda (Science of Life), the comprehensive,
natural health care system that originated in the
ancient Vedic times of India. The term “meditation” is
now loosely used to refer to a large number of diverse
techniques. These include contemplation, concentration,
use of nature sounds such as the ocean, guided meditation,
meditative movement exercises such as Yoga and tai
chi, qigong, breathing exercises, and Mantra. These
techniques work at different levels such as the senses,
mind, intellect, and emotions. Some techniques are easy
to learn and practice, while others are more difficult and
can result in participants giving up the practice rather
quickly. According to Vedic science (the knowledge of
the Vedic texts of ancient India), the true purpose of
meditation is to connect oneself to one's deep inner Self.
Techniques which achieve that goal serve the true purpose
of meditation.
The neurological and physiological correlates of meditative
experiences have been investigated previously and
describes the process of meditation at a more fundamental
level and aims to shed light on the deeper underlying
mechanism of the beneficial effects associated with
meditation. Research on the effects of meditation is
summarised.

‘Open your eyes and see
the beauty around you,
close your eyes and see
the beauty within you.’
MICHAEL JAMES WONG

91

JUST BREATHE

Meditation in the east
Although many forms of meditation can be found in ancient
religious traditions around the world, the practice as a
formal component of a spiritual path is probably most
closely associated with Buddhism. The Buddha, who lived
and taught in Southeast Asia about 2600 years ago,
founded an experiential path that inspired generations
of practitioners to sit in mindful awareness and breathe
their way to lasting peace. According to his teachings,
meditative concentration is one of three trainings
that when practiced together result n awakening, or
enlightenment. The other two are proper ethical conduct
and the wisdom of seeing things as they truly are.

An example of this is Zen meditation. In the 7th century,
the Japanese monk Dosho travelled to China where he
studied Buddhism under the great master Hsuan Tsang.
Upon returning to Japan, he opened a meditation hall
and started teaching a form of sitting meditation that
became known as zazen. This has given rise to generations
of Japanese monks and nuns whose primary practice is
sitting meditation.

Men and women who gained insight and wisdom by putting
the Buddha’s teachings into practice taught others. And
seekers would travel to learn from great teachers who
often lived in cultures far removed from their own, then
bring the teachings back home. At one point, people
were practicing some form of Buddhist meditation from
the territories of modern-day Afghanistan to Mongolia
and from Japan to Indonesia. Buddhism is known to be a
spiritual practice that has adapted to the cultures of the
regions where it has taken root.

The process of meditation
To truly understand meditation, one has to understand
how the human being is viewed by Vedic science - the
knowledge of the Vedic texts of ancient India.
The human being consists of three aspects, with their
associated functions:
1.

Physical body

2.

Inner faculty
The working consciousness, which is constantly
changing. This consists of:
• Mind: Processes sensory perceptions; has the quality
of duality, as seen in pairs of opposites, for example,
pleasure and pain, good and bad, hot and cold, etc.
• Intellect: Analyses, discriminates, decides, and judges
•E
 go: Doer and experiencer
•C
 hitta: The storehouse of all memories and
impressions of life

3.

92

 eep inner Self
D
The non-changing pure consciousness, which has
the quality of unity and witnesses the activity of the
inner faculty. The deep inner Self is the source of all
knowledge, intelligence, creativity, and all natural laws
that govern existence.

According to Vedic science, the deep inner Self activates
the inner faculty (working consciousness), which in turn
activates the physical body. A feedback loop is provided by
meditation, in which a conscious connection is made with
the deep inner Self. This view of the human being correlates
with the scientific view of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) in
the body. On the cellular level, DNA creates and controls all
activities in the body. Information from the DNA proceeds
to ribonucleic acid (RNA), then to the amino acids, through
which proteins are formed. A feedback loop to the DNA
starts a new cycle to provide whatever is needed for the
activities of the cell. In meditation, the feedback loop to the
deep inner Self (the seat of knowledge, like DNA) provides
inner peace and bliss, which removes the accumulated
stresses of life and improves overall health.

MEDITATION MODALITIES

Human beings routinely experience
three states of consciousness:
WAKING

DEEP SLEEP

When the inner faculty is in the waking state of
consciousness, it is aware of the physical body and is
involved with the outside objective world. In the dreaming
state of consciousness, it is aware of the inner dream
world, but is not aware of the physical body. In the deep
sleep state of consciousness, the inner faculty is not
functioning at all and is not aware of anything. In this state,
dualities such as pleasure and pain, good and bad, etc.., are
not experienced. There is no experience of stress, anxiety,
guilt, greed, envy, jealousy, anger, etc.. The only experience
in this state of unity is peace and bliss. This is why deep
sleep or a “good night's sleep” feels so good.
The deep inner self is always witnessing, or watching, the
activity of the inner faculty. The experience of watching
one's thoughts or daydreams occurs when the deep inner
Self witnesses the activity of the waking state. During
the dreaming state, this is experienced as watching one's
dreams. During the deep sleep state, however, the inner
faculty is asleep and not functioning on the level of duality.
This is experienced as the peace and bliss of unity, and
upon waking one feels refreshed from a good night's sleep.

DREAMING

storehouse of all memories and impressions of life), and
finally goes beyond both the outer and inner realms to
reach the deep inner Self. This deep inner Self is nonchanging pure consciousness, which witnesses the activity
of the inner faculty. The inner faculty is the working
consciousness, which is constantly changing. Going
beyond the changing inner faculty to the non-changing
pure consciousness provides inner peace and bliss, which
removes the accumulated stresses of life. This results in
energizing the body and improving overall health.
In deep sleep, the unity of the deep inner Self is
experienced. In the process of meditation, one experiences
the unity of the deep inner Self while aware and not
sleeping. This experience of the peace and bliss of unity
modifies the inner faculty. The properties of the deep
inner Self begin to extend into the inner faculty, and since
the deep inner Self is the source of all knowledge (which
correlates with DNA on the physical level), the benefits of
this process extend to all aspects of life - physical, mental,
emotional, spiritual, etc..

There are various forms of meditation. The meditation
process described herein attains the goal of meditation
described in the ancient Vedic texts. This meditation
process takes the mind from the outer realm of the
objective world to the inner realm of the inner faculty
(which includes the mind, intellect, ego, and Chitta - the

93

JUST BREATHE

Meditation moves west
In modern times, the art of meditation has mainly
been associated with Asian spiritual traditions such as
Theravada, Zen, and Tibetan Buddhism, to name but a few.
Western interest in Eastern religions and philosophies
seems to have begun in earnest in the 19th century due
to colonialism and improved means of transportation and
communication. In those days it was mainly the domain of
scholars and missionaries.

One of the most influential figures in the sphere of
mindfulness today is Dr. Jon Kabat-Zinn, who founded the
Center for Mindfulness at the University of Massachusetts
Medical School in 1979. His program, MBSR (Mindfulness
Based Stress Reduction), has been instrumental in
bringing the benefits of mindfulness practice – without any
religious overtones – to the public attention and scientific
communities worldwide.

Eastern philosophy caught the attention of western
“seekers” and artists as early as the late 19th century, but it
wasn’t until the mid-20th century that meditation became
popularised in the West. This period saw the arrival of
meditation masters from the East who were invited to
share their skills and knowledge with interested students.
There were also many western students of mindfulness
who were able to travel east and train under great masters
in India, Thailand, Burma and other Asian countries, then
bring their understanding of mindfulness and awareness
practices back home and share it.

The effects of meditation
During the process of meditation, accumulated stresses
are removed, energy is increased, and health is positively
affected overall. Research has confirmed a myriad of
health benefits associated with the practice of meditation.
These include stress reduction, decreased anxiety,
decreased depression, reduction in pain (both physical
and psychological), improved memory, and increased
efficiency. Physiological benefits include reduced blood
pressure, heart rate, lactate, cortisol, and epinephrine;
decreased metabolism, breathing pattern, oxygen
utilization, and carbon dioxide elimination; and increased
melatonin, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S), skin
resistance, and relative blood flow to the brain. Meditation
increases regional cerebral blood flow in the frontal and
anterior cingulate regions of the brain, increases efficiency
in the brain's executive attentional network, and increases
electroencephalogram (EEG) coherence. A study on the
effect of meditation on the executive attentional network
found that meditators were faster on all tasks. With aging,
the brain cortical thickness (gray matter, which contains
neurons) decreases, whereas meditation experience is
associated with an increase in gray matter in the brain.

94

Meditation decreases sympathetic over-stimulation and
reduces cholesterol and smoking. A study investigating
the effects of meditation on exercise-induced myocardial
ischemia in patients with coronary artery disease found
that meditation significantly increased exercise tolerance
and maximal workload, and delayed the onset of STsegment depression. In a randomized, controlled trial of
201 African-American men and women with coronary heart
disease, the effects of meditation versus health education
were investigated. After 5 years, there was a 48% risk
reduction in deaths, heart attacks, and strokes in the
meditation group. There was also a significant drop in blood
pressure and significant reduction in psychosocial stress
factors. Efficacy of meditation techniques has been found
for epilepsy, symptoms of premenstrual syndrome, and
menopausal symptoms. Benefits have been demonstrated
for mood and anxiety disorders, autoimmune illness, and
emotional disturbances in neoplastic disease.

MEDITATION MODALITIES

Research has shown that a program of comprehensive
lifestyle changes (including vegetarian diet and stress
management - meditation and breathing exercises)
improved health and modulated gene expression in
prostate cancer patients who were not treated with
surgery, radiation, or hormone therapy. This 3-month study
showed changes in more than 500 genes: 48 genes were
up-regulated and 453 genes were down-regulated. The
down-regulated genes included disease-promoting genes
with critical roles in tumorigenesis. There are distinct gene
expression changes induced not only by physical influences,
but also by psychological, social, and cultural factors, as
identified by the emerging field of psychosocial genomics.
Meditation and Yoga practices positively affect gene
expression.

Telomerase is the enzyme responsible for protecting and
maintaining the length of telomeres, the protective caps
at the end of chromosomes that promote chromosomal
stability. Shorter telomeres are associated with
accelerated aging and related diseases. Chronic stress
reduces telomerase activity and accelerates telomere
shortening and premature aging. Meditation and Yoga
practices improve telomerase activity and telomere
length. A study investigating the effect of meditation on
the aging process showed that long-term meditators have
a significantly younger biological age compared to shortterm meditators and controls. Meditation has resulted
in a significant reduction in payments to physicians by a
government health insurance agency. Over a period of 5
years, there was a cumulative reduction of 28% in highcost meditators compared to high-cost non-meditators.

Mindfulness
Mindfulness, as presented and defined by Jon Kabat-Zinn
is the awareness that arises from paying attention, on
purpose, in the present moment and non-judgementally.
Kabat-Zinn is an American professor emeritus of medicine
and the creator of the Stress Reduction Clinic and the
Centre for Mindfulness in Medicine, Health Care, and
Society at the University of Massachusetts Medical
School. He is widely credited as the “Father of modern
mindfulness’ and has been credited for leading the insights
and education around how mindfulness can be utilised in a
modern lifestyle.
What is the difference between meditation and
mindfulness?
Often students will ask you this question, and it can be
really helpful to have a clear and concise response. One
of the best ways to explain the differences between
meditation and mindfulness is to understand that
meditation is a technique and specific practice, or an
activity per se, whereas mindfulness is a perspective and
an ever present awareness in how you engage with the
world around you.

Meditation best practices
1.

Practice in the morning before sunrise or
within the first hour of your waking time

2.

Practice with an empty belly; no food, caffeine
or coffee

3.

 ind a comfortable seat, allow the physical
F
body to recede into the background,
use support props to help

4.

Take time to settle

5.

Be okay with not knowing, let the
experience unfold

6.

Commitment is needed

7.

Acknowledge wandering thoughts, but do
not indulge

8.

Use techniques purposefully

9.

 are only about the ‘after-effect’, the benefits
C
are found in how you feel after

95

JUST BREATHE

‘The secret to stillness is
realising that it is a pleasure,
not a punishment.’
MICHAEL JAMES WONG

96

MEDITATION MODALITIES

Meditation
Established
in being

Present moment
awareness

Focused
intention

EXPANDED AND
CONNECTED AWARENESS

INWARD OR
ATTENTIONAL AWARENESS

OUTWARD OR
INTENTIONAL AWARENESS

Cultivating awareness

Open monitoring techniques

Observation of the witness state

De-stimulating the mind

Creative and imaginative
low stress stimulation

6 phases of non-doing
Removing attachment triggers

Intuitive self awareness
and embodiment

Gentle down regulation narration

Effortless mind state

Reducing intellectual translation

Emotionally led feeling states

Breath awareness

Developing non-thinking
sensory response

Intellectually guided refinement

Quality vs. quantity axis

Just Breathe Meditation

Body Scan

Loving Kindness (Metta Bhavana)

Being ‘Mantra’ Meditation

Trataka (focused gaze)

Ajapa-japa (Mantra repetition)

5 Bodies

Visualisation

5 Senses

Guided meditation (Intention led)

Breath awareness

97

JUST BREATHE

The 10
steps of a
meditation
practice

98

MEDITATION MODALITIES

1. Opening invitation

6. Meditation technique

Offer an intentional transition into a quiet moment.
Use the mantra to invite the attention inwards.
Close your eyes, be still, just breathe.

Begin your techniques and use them intentionally to
quiet the mind. Being - Present Moment Awareness
- Focused Intention techniques are used here to
respond to different need states.
Today’s practice is…

2. Stillness

7. Conscious breath to close

Always begin with stillness in body and mind. Ensure
you are in a comfortable and settled space, remove
any distractions or temptations. Give yourself time
to arrive. This is a moment of deep rest.
Sit, settle, stillness.

As the technical practice comes to an end, use the
conscious breath (sometimes called the recovery
breath) as a point of closure and/or transition. An
even, full or sighing release will help to return the
breath to it’s natural pattern.
Let’s take one last breath together.

3. Cultivate awareness

8. Cultivate awareness

Begin to become aware of the moment as it is.
Do not rush to move into techniques, be here
completely.
Notice what you notice, and feel what you feel.

Return to the witness and observation state.
Recognise the state of your experience and how
you feel. Do not judge the sensations or try to
qualify their value here, instead just simply notice
again how you feel in this moment here.
How do you feel now?

4. Observe the breath

9. Stillness

Become aware of the natural state of your breath,
do not feel tempted to change or alter it. There is
great power in simply noticing it as it is, this is
your baseline.
Observe the quantity and quality axis.

Close your practice by returning to the state of
deep rest and stillness. Give time for the mind and
body to simply be at ease completely. Never rush
to return to your surrounding environment, rather
take time to come back gently.
Give yourself this moment to rest.

5. Conscious breath to begin

10. 3 Gratitudes

Before you begin to change the breath, take a
conscious breath as a signal of new beginnings.
This breath is full and deep and can be an even
breath or a sigh, whatever supports the
moment of initiation.
Take the biggest breath you’ve taken all day.

Close your practice by sealing in the experience
with stillness and gratitude. Offer the ritual
closing to acknowledge yourself, your support
and this moment. Allow each moment to be one
of sacred endeavour.
Let’s close this practice with three breaths
together.

99

JUST BREATHE

MEDITATION

3 depths of practice
Focused intention
External concentrative

Present moment awareness
Internal concentrative

Established in being
Non-doing contemplative

100

MEDITATION MODALITIES

‘On some days, words are
not needed, appreciate the
space to see what unfolds.’
MICHAEL JAMES WONG

101

JUST BREATHE

3 Depths of practice
FOCUSED
INTENTION

Techniques of the thinking mind

PRESENT
MOMENT
AWARENESS

Techniques of the witness

ESTABLISHED
IN BEING

Techniques for being, not doing

102

This style of practice is any technique that dedicates your attention to
something upward or outward. These practices will often ask for your focus
to be placed on a guided narrative, like a theme or a visualisation of a time
or place.

This style of practice is any technique that dedicates your awareness to
something inward only in the present moment. These practices ask you to
be completely attentive to the physical sensations or mental patterns in
the exact moment they’re unfolding. Sometimes these techniques will be
scans through the body, while others will be awareness and attentiveness
on the breath. Present Moment Awareness practices are often considered
a practice of relentless attention. Additionally there are some Present
Moment Awareness techniques that can be an outward gaze, like candle
gazing or cloud watching, however these practice at still attentive to the
hear and now.

This style of practice is a singular technique that dedicates yourself
to being, not doing. This practice invites a state of non-striving
transcendence, the state of going deeply inward, undisturbed by the
thinking mind or the ego.

MEDITATION MODALITIES

Techniques of practice

Visualisation

Loving kindness

Ajapa-Japa
(repetitive mantra
or affirmation)

Guided Meditation

Five senses
Body scan

Five bodies

Trataka
(outward focused gaze)
Watching the breath

Being technique

Mantras

Affirmations

103

JUST BREATHE

Being
technique
The being technique is an essential practice for meditation
and often regarded as the foundational practice in which
all other practices are built upon. A being meditation is a
mantra based practice that utilises a simple technique to
move away from the higher layers of the thinking mind and
transcend inward to a non-thinking or non-doing state of
consciousness. A being technique is the practice used in
such lineages as vedic and transcendental meditation.

104

The being technique is an inward, non-physical practice
and so we must cultivate the conditions in which we can
move away from any mental (thinking) or physical (body)
deterrents.

MEDITATION MODALITIES

6 Phases of non-doing
CONNECTION

FOCUS

THINKING

INTUITION

WITNESS

BEING

TENETS OF PRACTICE
There is no such thing as a bad meditation
All meditative practices are valuable if given the time
and technique. Often we can judge the practice by our
experience during the practice and we try to make
sense of the sensations or distractions we are having
as a metric for its value or success. However the
power of meditation is not what happens during the
time, but how you feel when it’s over.
We all have thoughts
It is impossible to turn off your thoughts, you are
not a light switch, you are human. And so we must
understand that with this techniques thoughts will
come, and we must let them go. For us to move
towards a state of being, we must remove the
temptations of distraction (thoughts) with purposeful
action. The being technique is a simple, yet powerful
practice to move into a deep state of being. The
practice this technique requires commitment to
the mantra, the practice and the cultivation of the
conditions for best practice.
We are still human
No matter how enlightened you may feel, you still exist
within a human body and so you will have physical
sensations. During a practice do not feel you must
ignore physical sensations or distractions, we must

honour and respect them as part of our existence.
If during the practice you have an itch or a scratch,
quickly resolve it, if you try to ignore it, it will continue
to pull your attention away from the practice and
its inward journey. When you deal with a physical
disturbance, it no longer exists in the mind.
Commit to the mantra
In this technique a mantra is used to quiet the thinking
mind towards an quieter place. Introduce your gifted
mantra after the mind and body has settled, allow it
to rest softly in the back of the mind, gently pulsing
like a turning lighthouse. Do not hold it tightly, this
is an effortless practice. In time as the mind begins
to transcend the mantra will soften and move you
into a state of being. Your only job is to commit to
the technique and nothing more. Do not worry ‘if it’s
working’, simply give way to the practice and do not let
your thinking mind get in the way of your journey.
Acknowledge, don’t indulge
Often in a practice you will have wandering thoughts,
this is natural you’re not a robot. And our aim with
meditation is not to turn these thoughts off but rather
our practice is to recognise when this happens and
simply return to the technique and not be tempted to
wander. Simply put, acknowledge, don’t indulge.

105

JUST BREATHE

Present
moment
awareness
This style of practice is any technique that brings your
attention completely into the present moment, primarily
internal states of awareness, or in some cases, outside
of the physical body to something visceral in your near
surroundings, like a candle, a flower or a set of passing
clouds. A present moment practice requires your full
awareness of what is happening in the moment, the
sounds, sensations of the body or quality of the breath.

106

This practice asks nothing of the thinking mind to
interpret or understand, it is a simply a practice of the
witness in action. There are many practices that will fall
into this style of practice and In this chapter we discuss
five present moment techniques commonly practiced
and suitable to share.

MEDITATION MODALITIES

Body scan
A body scan practice is one of the most effective ways to
tune in to your body, reconnecting yourself back to the
physical body. In this practice the technique is to simply
notice any sensations you’re feeling with full awareness, but
without judgement. While many people find the body scan
relaxing, relaxation is not the primary goal, the purpose is
attentiveness to the witness of your present experience.

When guiding a body scan meditation, it is common to
guide in an ascending way and work from the ground up, in
most cases this will be from the feet to the crown if you are
in a resting position, or from the seat to the crown if you
are in a seated position. Traditionally an ascending body
scan moves our awareness towards the witnessing mind,
where as a descending body scan often is used to help
ground or settle us.

Guiding the practice

A body scan meditation is delicate to guide, and we must
ensure that what we are saying is supporting the inward
experience. Therefore this is not the place for creative
language or constant conversations, instead simple, clear,
direct instruction and recommendation is essential.
Below you find the structure for guiding a body scan
meditation. This sequence helps to create awareness,
investigation and action of ease.
Be mindful not to add extra words around your statements
or unnecessary ‘fluff’ to the delivery.

3 Points of focus

When guiding a body scan, it’s helpful to offer 3 points of
focus when bring the attention to the specific location in
the body. Often in a state of deep practice, the audibility
of the guidance can be faint or delayed, therefore
repetition of location can be very helpful for people to stay
‘in practice’. However, if the same words are repeated
exactly verbatim, studies show that it intellect, or thinking
mind may still not attach or latch on to the instruction
or location. Therefore, a slight iteration, without more
cognitive load, can be more effective in offering support.
Here is the method that can be most helpful when guiding:
1.

Name the exact location of the awareness
“Bring your attention to the knee”

2.

Name the exaction location and where it is in the body
“The knee on the right side of the body”

3.

Where it is in the body, and what the exact location of
the awareness
“The right side of the body where the knee is”

107

JUST BREATHE

5 Statements of softening
(by location)

Create your repetitive guidance for the practice and
decide at the beginning what your 5 statements of
softening will be. This will help keep you on track, whilst also
allowing the participant to feel supported by your guidance,
and not distracted.

Location

Bring the attention to the exact location in the body ( 3 points of focus)
and ask the participant to find their way ‘here’. This is the essential first
step so they know where they are before anything more is asked.
Example: “Bring your attention to the knee”

Resent moment
statement or questions

Once ‘here’, ask for presence so that they are no longer ‘traveling’ to
the location. This is a signal to ‘be here now’. A statement or question is
helpful because it establishes the need to be here completely.
Example: “Can you be here now completely?”

Action of ease

A simple and clear instruction on what to do now that you are here.
This statement is about create ease, releasing, softening or letting go
of the tension.
Example: “Can you soften and be at ease?”

Awareness
acknowledgment

After the ‘action of ease’ it’s important to re-establish present
moment awareness in this new rested state. So we acknowledge the
moment again. This should not be a question, but instead a statement
or matter of fact.
Example: “Notice what you notice, feel what you feel”

Reaffirmation of ease

In this final state, reaffirm the state of state and ask for even more, or
further action. This helps to continually put the body in deep relaxation.
Example: “Can you soften even more?”

Start with a swallow

When practicing or guiding a body scan meditation,
starting with the invitation to swallow helps to shift the
awareness inward both physiologically and mentally.
This physical act helps to signal to the brain that we
are moving within and can give an act of intentional
transition of the awareness. This is purposeful
invitation to begin and travel inward.

108

MEDITATION MODALITIES

OUTLINE
ROTATION

1. Right Toes
2. Right Ankle
3. Right Foot
4. Right Knee
5. Right Hip
6. Left Toes
7. Left Ankle
8. Left Foot
9. Left Knee
10. Left Hip
11. Torso

12. Right Fingers
13. Right Wrist
14. Right Elbow
15. Right Shoulder
16. Left Fingers
17. Left Wrist
18. Left Elbow
19. Left Shoulder
20. Neck
21. Back of Head
22. Crown

23. Forehead
24. Eyes
25. Nose
26. Ears
27. Cheek bones
28. Chin
29. Lips
30. Jaw
31. Tongue
32. Swallow

ASCENDING
BOTTOM
TO TOP

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Toes
Feet
Ankles
Knees
Hips
Torso
Shoulders
Elbows

9. Wrists

17. Nose

10. Hands
11. Fingers
12. Neck
13. Back of Head
14. Crown
15. Forehead
16. Eyes

18. Ears
19. Cheek bones
20. Chin
21. Lips
22. Jaw
23. Tongue
24. Swallow

DESCENDING
TOP TO
BOTTOM

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Crown
Forehead
Eyes
Nose
Ears
Cheek bones
Lips
Chin

9. Neck
10. Shoulders
11. Elbows
12. Wrists
13. Hands
14. Fingers
15. Torso
16. Hips

17. Knees
18. Ankles
19. Feet
20. Toes

BODY SCAN MEDITATION
CUING (EXAMPLE)

1A. Bring your attention to the right hip
1B. The hip on the right side of your body
1C. The right side of your body where the hip is
2.

Can you be here completely?

3.

Can you soften and be at ease?

4.

Notice what you notice and feel what you feel

5.

And can you soften even more

109

JUST BREATHE

Five bodies

TECHNIQUE

Koshas are the Sanskrit word for ‘layers’ or ‘sheaths’
of the body. In this practice we move our awareness
through the 5 bodies of being. For some people this
practice is considered a practice of present moment
awareness, while other teachers will consider this
a focused intention practice. Both are valid, the
consideration is whether your personal belief is if
we truly do exist with five bodies, or if it’s merely
an inspired perspective about our existence. Many
practices can feel blended with style or approach, do
not feel that all practices must be mutually exclusive
to one style. There is no value in trying to put your
practices in certain or assigned boxes.

1.

How do you feel in the physical body?
The gross outer body?
2.

PRANAMAYA

How do you feel in the breath?
How does the energy pass through?
3.

MANOMAYA

How do you feel in the mind?
What does your intellect say?
4.

VIJNAMAYA

What sensations do you feel?
How do you feel in the heart?

The technique will follow your sensations one at a
time moving through the layers of our being from the
other kosha inwards towards bliss.

Five senses

ANAMAYA

5.

ANANDAMAYA

How you feel in bliss?
Here you are in peace.

This is a practice of moving inward through the
five senses of the human body. The purpose of this
practice is to segregate our awareness so that we
are only focused on one sensation or stimulation
at a time. This can be practice both internally
and externally, dependent on how you choose to
facilitate the technique. The technique will follow your
sensations one at a time, often from the outside in.

TECHNIQUE
1.

SOUND

4.

What can you hear? What sound does it
make? Is it faint or familiar? Does create
an inhale or an exhale?
2.

SIGHT

What do you see? What are the textures
the colours and patterns? Is it faint or
familiar? Does create an inhale or an
exhale?
3.

SMELL

What do you smell? How does it make
you feel? Is it faint or familiar? Does
create an inhale or an exhale?

110

TOUCH

What does it feel like? What do you notice?
Is it faint or familiar? Does create an inhale
or an exhale?
5.

TASTE

What does it taste like? In the mouth? As
you swallow?Is it faint or familiar? Does
create an inhale or an exhale?

MEDITATION MODALITIES

Trataka
Trataka is the Sanskrit word “to look” or “to gaze”, and is an
ancient practice of meditation used in Ayurvedic medicine
that involves focusing the eyes on an external object.
Common practices include candle gazing, passing clouds,
wall watching and more. This a practice of relentless
attention, and requires a full commitment the moment.
Often this is a good practice for beginning students who
are not yet comfortable sitting within themselves or for
people who are unable to close their dues because of fear,
anxiety or trauma.

While this practice is an eyes open practice, it’s purpose
is an internal one. Our eyes may be attentive to something
outside of ourselves, but through this practice we are able
to see how our mind creates temptation to distract us
elsewhere in thought or attention. Eventually, with practice,
this meditation technique can be done internally, with
closed eyes as the student can internalise the external and
keep this vision within during the practice.

Watching the breath
Watching the breath is a meditation technique that
encourages the bypassing of thoughts, emotions or
distractions by bringing the attention completely to the
present moment of the breath. While seemingly mundane,
the approach is not about attachment or judgement, but
rather complete acknowledgement and present. The aim
of this practice is simple, watch the breath, observe the
breath, acknowledge the breath. When we do this, we are
signalling to the mind that distractions have no place in
this moment. Similar to a being practice, we use the breath
as an anchor for our attention, however unlike a being
practice we are only observing rather than offering any
form of mantra or invitation.

This practice can also be a form of mindful breathing, which
allows us to shift our attention to breath awareness and
recognition. It is not a practice of quantity or quality, simply
a practice of observation and acknowledgment.
This technique is arguably the easiest and hardest practice
at the same time and require a full commitment to the
state of the present moment completely.

‘True presence is the
gift the ego cannot steal.’
MICHAEL JAMES WONG
111

JUST BREATHE

Focused
Intention
This style of practice is any technique that brings your
attention to a conceptual intention or narrative. These
are often practices that conjure a sense of creativity,
imagination, visualisation or a deep connection to the spirit
or spiritual practices.
There are many practices that will fall into this style and in
this chapter we discuss four focused intention techniques
commonly practiced and suitable to share as meditation
guides; loving kindness, visualisation, guided meditations
and Ajapa-japa.

112

A common form of focused intention practices are
techniques that tell stories, share wisdoms and create
a heartfelt connection to a concept, idea or emotion. All
practices that fall within this style of practice are often
techniques of the head (the intellectual mind) that are
felt in the heart (the felt body). Often when we are guided
through a meditation with a meaningful intention, or a
dedicated focus, our intellect is still is being stimulated and
even the most gentle and loving narrative will inevitably
instigate curiosity, stimulated focus or wonderment.

MEDITATION MODALITIES

Loving kindness
The original name of this practice is metta
bhavana, which comes from the Pali language.
Metta means ‘love’ (in a non-romantic sense),
friendliness, or kindness: hence ‘loving-kindness’
for short. It is an emotion, something you feel
in your heart. Bhavana means development or
cultivation. The commonest form of the practice
is in five stages as shown below.

S

O

SO

LO

M

VE

LOVE FOR
YOURSELF

EO

ME

LO

ONE NEUTR

VE F

LOV

N E YO U

OR AN ENE

AL

MY

E TO TH E WO R LD

TECHNIQUE
1.

Feel love for yourself
Start by become aware of yourself, and
focusing on feelings of peace, calm, and
tranquillity. Then you let these grow in to
feelings of strength and confidence, and then
develop into love within your heart. You can
use an image, like golden light flooding your
body, or a phrase such as ‘may I be well and
happy’, which you can repeat to yourself.
These are ways of stimulating the feeling of
love for yourself.

2.

Give love to someone you love
Start by imagining a good friend. Bring them
to mind as vividly as you can, and think of
their good qualities. Feel your connection
with your friend, and your liking for them, and
encourage these to grow by repeating ‘may
they be well; may they be happy’ quietly to
yourself. You can also use an image, such as
shining light from your heart into theirs.

3.

Give love to someone neutral or an
acquaintance
Then think of someone you do not have
particularly strong feelings for. Your feelings
are ‘neutral’. This may be someone you do
not know well but see around. You reflect

on their humanity, and include them in your
feelings of metta. Send them love and well
wishes no matter the path they are on or the
circumstances they keep.
4.

Give love to an enemy
Finally think of someone you do not like, someone
you might consider an “enemy” or someone
you have difficulty being around. Do not waste
thought or emotion getting caught up in any
feelings of hatred, think of them positively and
send your love equally to them as well.

5.

Give love to the world
In the final stage, first of all you think of all four
people together — yourself, the friend, the
neutral person, and the enemy. Then extend
your feelings further — to everyone around
you, to everyone in your neighbourhood; in your
town, your country, and so on throughout the
world. Have a sense of waves of loving-kindness
spreading from your heart to everyone, to all
beings everywhere. Then gradually relax out of
meditation, and bring the practice to an end.

113

JUST BREATHE

Visualisation
Visualisation techniques are beneficial for people who are
new to meditation or have trouble sitting without gentle
distraction. To share these practices well it is important
to control the pace, flow and narrative and gift people a
meaningful experience of exploration in the mind so that
everything else fades away.

The technique of practice is a narrative exploration of an
idea, concept, place or perspective. Often it is a guide
towards something that does not exist in the present
moment or present location, this can be a narrative of a
walk on the beach or the idea of sitting infant of a cosy
fire. When we teach visualisation techniques, we are
sharing details and considerations. Each practice is a way
to transport students into a very specific time and place
where the guide (teacher) is in control of the sensory
experience.

TECHNIQUE
Visualisation meditation is a technique
that moves us from intentional thinking
to an embodied feeling

VISUALISATION
THINKING

EMBODIMENT
FEELING

How do we do this?

WHO
WHAT
WHEN
WHERE
WHY

WHO
WHERE
WHEN
WHAT
HOW

WHO

WHERE

WHAT

Now

Folding
Step-by-step

Time of day

Narrowing

Location
You

Object

Objective
(statement)
Time of year

Expanding
Subjective
(question)

Abstract

THINKING

114

HOW

Time of
existence

Unfolding
Sensing

Not relevant

Inquiring

FEELING

EMBODIMENT

VISUALISATION

WHEN

MEDITATION MODALITIES

‘Wisdom is knowing what
is not needed, and leaving
behind what is not wanted.’
MICHAEL JAMES WONG

115

JUST BREATHE

‘In haste all edges sharpen,
in time they soften.’
MICHAEL JAMES WONG

116

MEDITATION MODALITIES

Ajapa-japa
Japa is the Sanskrit word for ‘repeating’ or ‘remembering’
a mantra or affirmation. Ajapa-japa means constant and
continuous awareness of that mantra. When an ‘A’ is placed
in front of a word, in this case ‘japa’ it means ‘without’, and
thus ‘Ajapa’ means to ‘no chanting’ or ‘stop thinking’ about
the material nature of the mantra or it’s meaning.
Therefore, ajapa-japa is the practice of ‘japa’, but without
the dedicated intellectual effort needed to relentless hold
the mantra. However for many people, the absolute state

of ajapa-japa cannot be reached and so more commonly
this practice is a gentle, but dedicated attention is placed
on the mantra as you chant quietly to yourself. The most
common practice of Ajapa-japa is chanting to oneself 108
slokas, often supported with a mala bead to keep track.
Simply put, this technique is repeating the same mantra
108 times, quietly to yourself with dedicated attention to
the full embodiment of the affirmation being offered to the
self and the divine.

TRADITIONAL MANTRAS PRACTICED
1.

Satchidananda (Sat-chit-ananda)

Sat = Truth
Chit = Consciousness
Ananda = Bliss

2.

Aham Brahmasmi

I am my truest self
Aham = I am
Brahmasmi = Divine / Sacred / Absolute / 				
Consciousness/ Atman (true - eternal self)

3.

Jai Guru Dev

Victory to the greatness in you (or greatest teacher)
Translation:
Jai = Victory / celebration / praise
Guru = Teacher, one who removes darkness
Dev = light / luminous / glowing

117

JUST BREATHE

Guided meditation
This is a technique of a guided narrative or the concept
of ‘telling a story’. In modern practices, this is one of the
most commonly used techniques because it stimulates the
mind, much like a good story or a book would. When guiding
a meditation, the aim is to speak purposefully of a theme,
idea or intention, common themes are kindness, gratitude,

118

love or perhaps inspiration. With this style of practice any
theme is appropriate as long as there is purpose. When
guiding this style of practice it’s important that there is
structure and there are two common approaches for
this technique.

MEDITATION MODALITIES

Words to Live By
Sharing a profound wisdom

All guided mediation practices should have “Words to Live
By”, a profound wisdom to share.
Be it a quote, a memorable statement or a affirmation of
your own design, it’s about sharing a clear and precise
wisdom with an empowering purpose of meaning.
When it comes to guiding a practice, you can place your
words using different techniques (as shown on the following
pages) in key places of connection. You could share your
words at the start or you can finish the practice with them.
Or could repeat them throughout so they continually
reaffirm. Regardless in how you share, they should be
standalone and powerful in their statement and in their
entirety.
Some would call this a ‘moral of the story’ or a ‘life lesson’,
a ‘shared wisdom’, we call it your Words To Live By.

Bookends
A clear start and finish

In this style of guidance we are opening and closing with our words
to live by, we are being clear, precise and empowering with what our
meditation is about. This technique can be effective because you are
allowing inquisitive minds know what intention is at the beginning, and
for gentler minds, you are finishing with it as a lasting thought.

Guiding light
Creating a narrative

A guiding light narrative is much like a good book, there is a beginning,
middle and end. There is a gentle narrative arc where a theme or idea
is introduced in the beginning, in the middle it is expanded on with
definitions, examples or greater considerations and in conclusion there
is often guidance on personal application to own lives and the world
around us.

Light housing
A constant reminder
throughout

When we light house a guided meditation we are providing a constant
reminder throughout with repetition and ritual reaffirmation. Between
statements and guidance, we return to our words as a way to keep
hitting home our focus and intention.
This is a good technique when starting, because it allows you to be
more ‘bite sized’ in your narrative.

Bread crumbs
Leaving a trail to
find your way

In this style of guidance, it is about ‘the big reveal’. Your guidance
along the way are like breadcrumbs to follow or little clues to collect
that culminate in a grand moment of clarity in conclusion. This style
of practice is good for keeping the attention of the practitioner, or
creating allure and indulgence throughout.

119

JUST BREATHE

Finding a comfortable seat
Here is a selection of seated and propped variations for
breathwork and meditation.

Traditional seat

Supported seat

Leg support

Cross legged seat, soft cushion or
blanket to sit on

Cross legged seat, soft cushion or
blanket to sit on, spinal support, back
rested against the wall

Cross legged seat,soft cushion or
blanket to sit on, rolled blankets
under upper thighs

Lumbar support

Sacral support

Thoracic support

Cross legged seat, soft cushion or
blanket to sit on, double lumbar
strap support

Cross legged seat, soft cushion or
blanket to sit on, block supporting the
sacrum against the wall

Cross legged seat, soft cushion or
blanket to sit on, block supporting
the middle thoracic

120

MEDITATION MODALITIES

Breath awareness

Safe & supported

Seated in a chair

Cross legged seat, soft cushion or
blanket to sit on, strap around the
ribcage

Cross legged seat, soft cushion or
blanket to sit on, bolster on lap

Sitting in a chair, rolled matt behind
the back, bolster on lap

‘We do not meditate
for the eyes closed
experience, we meditate
for the eyes open one.’
121

JUST BREATHE

122

4

SUBSECTION TITLE

Integration &
teaching methods
NSRT sequences &
breathwork protocols

MODULE 9

Nervous System Regulation Techniques (NSRT)

MODULE 10

ABC123 Breathwork Method

MODULE 11

The Just Breathe Method

MODULE 12

Signature practice, protocols & sequences

123

JUST BREATHE

Breathwork

Functional

Systematic

Experiential

NERVOUS SYSTEM RECOGNITION

NERVOUS SYSTEM REGULATION

NERVOUS SYSTEM RELEASE

Respiratory physiology

Self-sustainable techniques

Full body-mind connection

Stress management

Proactive essential practices

Hyper stimulation reduction

Guidance for responsive sequences

Conscious awareness
and expanded states

Breath variability

Manipulation of techniques,
ratio and rounds

Breath awareness

Recovery and safety protocol
Emotional release

Quality vs. quantity axis

Voluntary vs. involuntary

ABC123 VARIABLE
BREATHING TECHNIQUES

Non-ordinary states of consciousness

Diaphragmatic, costal, clavicular

Direct Response

Active and effortful hyperventilation

Active, passive, recovery

Gradual Response

HOW WE BREATHE

TRANSFORMATIONAL BREATHING

Nasal vs. mouth breathing
4-part breathing architecture
Anatomy of the breath
WHY WE BREATHE
Sympathetic /
parasympathetic divisions
Down regulation vs. up regulation

EXHALE & ESSENTIAL
DAILY PRACTICES

Conscious connected breathing

Incl: calming, soothing,
grounding, balancing

Somatic introspection

Down regulating, awakening,
energising, uplifting
Daily 5 & Gentle 10
movement exercises

Cardiovascular & lung health
NSRT METHOD FOR
PRACTICE GUIDANCE
Technical execution and combinations
Elements of supportive response
Key factors of facilitation

124

HOLOTROPIC BREATHING

Constant and continuous

NSRT SEQUENCES
& BREATHWORK
PROTOCOLS
INTEGRATION
& TEACHING
METHODS

Meditation

Established
in being

Present moment
awareness

Focused
intention

EXPANDED AND
CONNECTED AWARENESS

INWARD OR
ATTENTIONAL AWARENESS

OUTWARD OR
INTENTIONAL AWARENESS
Creative and imaginative
low stress stimulation

Cultivating awareness

Open monitoring techniques

Observation of the witness state

De-stimulating the mind

6 phases of non-doing
Removing attachment triggers

Intuitive self awareness
and embodiment

Gentle down regulation narration

Effortless mind state

Reducing intellectual translation

Emotionally led feeling states

Breath awareness

Developing non-thinking
sensory response

Intellectually guided refinement

Quality vs. quantity axis

Just Breathe Meditation

Body Scan

Loving Kindness (Metta Bhavana)

Being ‘Mantra’ Meditation

Trataka (focused gaze)

Ajapa-japa (Mantra repetition)

5 Bodies

Visualisation

5 Senses

Guided meditation (Intention led)

Breath awareness

125

JUST BREATHE

Breath assessment

The breath assessment is an evaluation tool to
use to identify the necessary response for breath
dysregulation. Before we can offer a technique or
practice sequence, it’s imperative to understand the
current state of the individual. In a breath assessment
we are in a stage of gathering insights so we can best
support the person or individual in real time.

1. Ask
Start by asking questions to understand the state of
breath in the individual. We also start by allowing the
person to self identify and share how they feel and how
they are breathing. It is worth mentioning that how people
feel or how they say they are breathing may not reflect
what you see, but we also acknowledge the self assessment
and awareness of the individual and appreciate the current
state that they are in.

Helpful questions to ask:
•

How are you feeling?

•

What has been happening today?

•

How are you breathing right now?

•

Tell me about the quantity and location of your breath?

•

Tell me about the quality and ease of your breath?

•

Tell me about the capacity and fullness of your breath?

2. Assess
Once you have had a conversation with the individual it
is now time to assess and identify both the needs of the
person and response you will take. In order to do so, use
the basic breath assessment tools below to give you more
insight as you gather understanding of the state of the
individuals breath and nervous system.
Look - what do you see?
Assess the location of the breath, and the ease or
difficulty in which they are breathing. If you are seeing
the breath high in the chest and rapid, with short or
shallow inhalations this person is in a heightened state of
sympathetic response. Pay close attention to the where
the breath is inhaling too and if there is resistance to the
how the breath is coming in and out.

Listen - what can you hear?
A calm and natural breath is usually a quiet and gentle
breath. If the individual has a laboured and/or noisy
breath then it is likely they are in heightened disregulation. If it sounds like the breath has resistance,
or their words sounds breath less, this will likely give
indication for necessary response.
Feel - what do you notice?
If appropriate, go hands on. Use your hands (as per
the hands on breath assessment technique) to feel the
location and distribution of breath in the body. This
may give more indication and/or insight for assessment
response.

3. Respond
Once you have enough insight and information, begin to
create a response for the individual. Utilising breathwork,
meditation and deep rest to help manage stress, reduce
hyper stimulation and down regulation the nervous system.
Use your ABC123 methodology to support for different
states of dis-regulation. If in doubt, reference practices
and sequences in this manual, or seek outside support
from peers or experts.

126

Remember you are not a clinician or medical professional
(unless you are) so ensure you stay within the boundaries
of what is appropriate for your level of care and expertise.
Always seek support as needed and refer to specialist
if more professional support is needed. Be conscious of
using terms like diagnosis, treatment or prescription if you
are not a medical or clinical professional.

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

BREATH ASSESSMENT

Use this space for a case study practice.

ASK

ASSESS

RESPOND

127

JUST BREATHE

Breath awareness axis
This axis of measurement is a tool for breath
awareness and assessment.
Quantity
Reflective of amount and/or location of the brief. Low
quantity is typically a costal or clavicular breath pattern in
a vertical breathing motion of the ribcage. High quality is
typically diaphragmatic and full breaths.

Quality
Reflective of inhalation and exhalation resistance. Low
quality is mouth breathing, short and sharp inhalation
and exhalation. High quality is nasal breathing and
full circumference breathing in the entire torso and
diaphragm.
Capacity
Reflective of absorption and feeling of fullness at the top
and bottom of the breath.

Quantity

Capacity

Quality

128

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

Hands on techniques for breath awareness
Here is a technique to use for understanding and
assessing the breath when working in a 1:1 situation.
This hands on approach can help to receive sensory
understanding and tactile awareness to both asses the
breath and instigate increased qualitative, quantitative
and capacity breathing. Be aware that this technique
may not be applicable for everyone, please ensure it is
relevant and appropriate when using.

The objective of this technique is to use physical touch
to invite increased breath and capacity which can help
individuals breath more and better into the full range and
space of the torso and activate diaphragmatic engagement
and action. Always start with visual assessment and then
when ready use tactile touch.

Step 1
Ask the individual to sit cross legged on the floor or on a chair or seat
without back support. Position yourself behind them and place your hands
on their lower back, plans placed approximately over their kidney and
lumbar region.
Notice if there is breath awareness and active breath movement in this
region. Once aware, ask the individual to intentionally inflate and create
movement and expansion here in the body. This will help full capacity
diaphragmatic breathing.

Step 2
Move the hands up the torso to the ribcage on the posterior ribcage. Allow
the palms to make contact below the scapula so you can feel intercostal
muscular engagement and inflation. Notice lung inflation and expansion and
use tactile touch to invite a full breath circumference.
If the movement of the ribcage and torso is leading towards thoracic
elevation only, use this exercise to create awareness to redirect breathing
region.

Step 3
Place one hand horizontally across the middle thoracic between the
shoulder blades. Place the other hand on the front of the torso in the upper
half or top third of the sternum plate. The hands should be aligned front
and back.
This placement of the hands allows the individual to feel front and back
expansive moments simultaneously and give tactical awareness for full
inflation. This will ultimately help with 360 degree breathing technique and
increased quality, quantity and capacity.

129

JUST BREATHE

A complete
experience

In this section we’ll look at the details of practice and
understand how specific techniques are combined to
create a practice sequence.
When preparing to guide a breathwork or meditation
practice, we must first establish what we are sharing
and how it should be practiced. Remember there
is a distinct difference between a technique and a
practice. A technique is specific to one action whereas
a practice is sequence of actions and events.

130

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

3 Elements of practice
Here are 3 things you need to consider when creating a practice for yourself or to share:

1. Technique

What is the technique that you will be using? Do you
have a clear understanding of how it’s executed?
If it’s a breathing practice be clear on both the type of
breath pattern as well as the breathing technique?
If it’s a meditation practice, ensure you are clear on
what function of the mind you are attending to?

2. Ratio

In a breathing practice ratio is the count or time
between active breaths and retained ones. For
example, 4:1:4:1 equates to inhale for the count of 4,
pause for 1 count, exhale to the count of 4, pause
for 1 count.

3. Rounds

Often in a breathing practice we are repeating a
specific technique multiple rounds. It can be valuable
to establish the number of repetitions you are doing or
alternatively the amount of time you are practicing for.
This is not only so you have a set practice length,
but also so your students understand the full practice
and are not anxious about how long the practice will
go on for.

TIPS FOR BEST PRACTICE

1.

Be comfortable, find your supported seat

2. Be intentional with your techniques
3. Be self-aware, before, during and after
4. Be ok with the feelings, let the experience unfold
5. Be committed, allow the breath and body time to respond

‘Healing begins, when
attachment ends.’
MICHAEL JAMES WONG

131

JUST BREATHE

Nervous System
Response Techniques
At Just Breathe we believe in a multi-disciplinary approach
to supporting people’s mind and mental health. Why?
Because everyone is different, and our daily challenges and
circumstances change in a very increasingly busy world.
By learning and having access to different styles of practice
and modalities it enables us to be better equipped to
support others and help ourselves and each other to
respond to the needs of the moment.
The one thing that is common throughout our techniques,
practices and methodologies shared is that everything
can be learned in a self-sustainable way, meaning that
once learned, they can be practised anywhere, anytime
without the need for a teacher or guide. We believe that no
practices are so sacred that they should have gatekeepers

132

or that anyone should be or feel reliant on any person,
teacher or guide, to practice or have access to these
essential techniques for our everyday well-being.
We use the term Nervous System Response Techniques
or NRST to best encapsulate and explain our approach
to practice. This, in conversation, helps to highlight that
our methods are not about ‘what’ techniques we use, but
instead ‘why’ we use them.
Ultimately we believe that the best way to support people
is to give consideration to their unique and personal
circumstance, to see them individually and utilise the
established and developed techniques return to a state of
ease and everyday well-being.

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

Reaction vs. response
What is the difference between a reaction and response?
And why is it worth understanding at this early stage of
learning? Often when we speak of reaction vs. response,
we are talking about the difference between impulse and
conscious action. And the significant difference is often a
lack of awareness and consideration before action. Without
awareness we are typically reactive to stimulus without
consideration or control. And for many of us, this
is something we’re all too familiar with. Why? Because
we’re human.
There are likely moments in our lives when we’ve reacted
with emotion, or frustration, we’ve said things we
don’t mean or acted in ways we’re not proud of. These
are reactions to moments when we are triggered or
challenged. Now when we say ‘triggered’ we do not mean in

a traumatic or critical way, but merely in a way that triggers
an immediate or autonomous reaction based on past
experience, elevated sensation or learned behaviour.
And so, as we begin to expand to dive into quiet practices
we must begin to understand the empowering ability to
choose intentional responses, even in the most challenging
conditions and widen the space in which we can decisively
choose how or what we want to do next. When we have
the ability to respond with consideration, or acknowledge
without reaction we reduce stress, anxiousness, anger and
other exhausting and dis-regulating emotional swings. And
it’s here in the space between our experiences and actions
where we can truly find the greatest benefit in our selfawareness and personal growth.

Direct vs. gradual response

When utilising NSRT techniques we must always have a
personalised approach to support individual needs in
times of stress, stimulation and dis-regulation.

DIRECT RESPONSE

GRADUAL RESPONSE

A direct response is needed in moments of
heightened or extreme overwhelm, stress or panic.
Physical, tangible and immediate down regulation
techniques are the most effective in these scenarios.

A gradual response is best utilised to shift the breath
and regulate the nervous system over a period
of time. A gradual response is synonymous with a
sequence or structured practice, or implementing
specific techniques through a series of rounds or
ratios. This could be either down regulating or up
regulating.

Examples of a direct response:
•

Physiological sigh

•

Humming breath

•

Audible release

•

Body shaking

•

Active movement

•

Grounding

Rest & digest

Examples of a gradual response:
•

ABC123 breathwork practice

•

Being meditation

•

Present moment awareness meditation

•

Focused Intention meditation

•

Deep rest

•

Gentle 10

Rest & digest

133

JUST BREATHE

Nervous system reset

This basic exercise helps to reset the vagus nerve and align
the cervical vertebrae and alleviate held strain, tension and
tightness in the neck and cranium. This ‘Basic Exercise’
as referenced in Stanley Rosenberg’s work Accessing the
Healing Power of the Vagus Nerve helps to reposition the
atlas (C1) and axis (C2) and increase mobility in the neck
and the entire spine. Additionally in increases blood flow to
the breasted, where the five cranial nerves necessary for
social engagement originate. This can have a positive effect
on the ventral branch of the vagus nerve as well as the
cranial nerves.

STEP 1

STEP 3

Lying comfortably on your back, weave the
fingers of one hand together with the fingers of
the other hand (fig 1, 2, 3).

Keeping your head in place, look to the right,
moving as far as you comfortably can. Do not turn
your head; just move your eyes. Keep looking to
the right.

STEP 2
Put your hands behind the back of your head,
with the weight of your head resting comfortably
on your interwoven fingers. You should feel the
hardness of your cranium with you fingers, and
you should feel the bones of your fingers on the
back of your heard. If you have a stiff shoulder and
cannot bring both of your hands up behind the
back of your head, it is sufficient to use one hand,
with the fingers and palm contacting both sides
of the back of your head.

FIG 1

134

FIG 2

FIG 3

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

STEP 4

STEP 6

After a short period of time, up to thirty or even
sixty seconds, you will swallow, yawn or sigh. This
is a sign of relaxation in your autonomic nervous
system. (A normal in breath is followed by an out
breath, but a sigh is different - after you breath
in, a second in breath follows on top of the first in
breath, before the out breath).

Leave your hands in place, and keep your head
still. This time, move your eyes to the left.

STEP 7
Hold your eyes there until you notice a sigh,
a yawn, or a swallow.

STEP 5
Bring your eyes back to looking straight ahead.

FIG 5

STEP 8

FIG 4

BEFORE & AFTER
THE EXERCISE

Return to a resting positing of the eyes and close
them for 10 to 20 seconds.

Evaluate the relative freedom of movement of your head and neck. Rotate your head
to the right as far as it goes comfortably. Then come back to the centre, pause, and
rotate your head to the left. How far do you rotate each side? Is there any pain or
stiffness? After doing the exercise, make these same movements again. Is there any
improvement in the range of your movement? If there was pain when you rotated your
head, did the exercise reduce the level of the pain?
Most people are surprised to experience an improvement in the range of movement
as they rotate their head to the right and left. Better movement of the neck often
accompanies an improvement in the circulation of blood to the brain stem, which in
turn improves the function of the ventral brand of the vagus nerve.
NOTE: If you become dizzy when you sit up or stand up, it is probably because you
relaxed when you were lying down, and your blood pressure dropped. This is a normal
reaction. It usually takes a minute or two before your blood pressure adjusts and
pumps more blood to your brain.

This exercise is reference and credited to Stanley Rosenberg, Accessing the Healing Power of the Vagus Nerve, page 285-290

135

JUST BREATHE

The Daily 5

These practice invite 5 daily movements to help
calm and soothe the nervous system.

A Signature Just Breathe Practice

1. SHOULDER ROLLS - 1 MINUTE
Keeping your hands behind the head, begin by tucking
the chin and allowing the shoulders to roll forward and
elbows to close around the head. Then open the chest,
heart, shoulders and elbows and lift the thoracic spine.
Repeat this movement freely, opening and closing the
chest, lubricating the shoulder girdle and creating
thoracic mobility. This upper chest motion will create
space, and shift into the parasympathetic response.

2. HIP CIRCLES - 1 MINUTE
Place your hands on your hips and start mobilising
the parasympathetic dorsal vagal complex (freeze
response) shifting into a state of ease and release.
Allow your hips to move freely in circles, ensure you
are rotating in both clockwise and counter clock wise
direction.

136

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

3. SHAKE AND BRUSH - 1 MINUTE
The body holds stored tension and tightness, use
intuitive movement to shake and bounce to release
held stale energy in the body. Start by bouncing the
shoulders and shaking the hands and arms. If you are
standing, you might like to bounce and shake the legs.
This movement is stimulating and releasing, you also
may enjoy sighing or allowing an audible groan or tone.

4. CIRCULATION AWAKENING - 1 MINUTE
Using physical touch begin to tap, cup your hands or
make balled fists as you self-massage and awaken
the body. Start from the bottom and move upwards
pounding on the back of your calves, fronts of quads,
glutes, lower back, belly, chest, arms, shoulders and
neck. If you find spots on your body that delicate at first,
use the rhythmic movements of your touch to offer
release and self massage. Use firm to vigorous pressure
as you work throughout your body as an aid to support
your circulatory system and blood flow.

5. STANDING TWIST - 1 MINUTE
Come to standing (or sitting) and allow the arms to
be loose and hanging at your side. Keeping the spine
upright and gently begin to turn and swing the spine
freely left to right (lateral/transverse movement),
letting the arms follow. Do this at a gentle pace but with
enough movement to create a fluid swinging motion.
Lead the movement with the torso, not the arms. At the
completion on the time, allow the body to slow down
naturally and come to a stillness, try not to abruptly halt
the twisting movement.

137

JUST BREATHE

The Gentle 10
A Signature Just Breathe Practice

The Gentle 10 is a physical practice designed to help
prepare the body for stillness. These ten essential
movement exercises help to awaken the senses and create
space in the body to support longer periods of sitting. This
ten minute, or ten movement practice can be done directly
before your sitting practice and is designed to support
a wide variety of body types and abilities. If any of the
movements are not accessible, modify as needed or skip
completely. No prior movement experience is necessary.
Wear comfortable clothes where you can stretch easily.
Start with the Daily 5 and add the 5 movements to
complete the Gentle 10. Please find below descriptions and
techniques for each stretch and movement.

1. SHOULDER ROLLS - 1 MINUTE
Keeping your hands behind the head, begin by tucking
the chin and allowing the shoulders to roll forward and
elbows to close around the head. Then open the chest,
heart, shoulders and elbows and lift the thoracic spine.
Repeat this movement freely, opening and closing the
chest, lubricating the shoulder girdle and creating
thoracic mobility. This upper chest motion will create
space, and shift into the parasympathetic response.

2. HIP CIRCLES - 1 MINUTE
Place your hands on your hips and start mobilising
the parasympathetic dorsal vagal complex (freeze
response) shifting into a state of ease and release.
Allow your hips to move freely in circles, ensure you
are rotating in both clockwise and counter clock wise
direction.

138

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

3. SHAKE AND BRUSH - 1 MINUTE
The body holds stored tension and tightness, use
intuitive movement to shake and bounce to release
held stale energy in the body. Start by bouncing the
shoulders and shaking the hands and arms. If you are
standing, you might like to bounce and shake the legs.
This movement is stimulating and releasing, you also
may enjoy sighing or allowing an audible groan or tone.

4. CIRCULATION AWAKENING - 1 MINUTE
Using physical touch begin to tap, cup your hands or
make balled fists as you self-massage and awaken
the body. Start from the bottom and move upwards
pounding on the back of your calves, fronts of quads,
glutes, lower back, belly, chest, arms, shoulders and
neck. If you find spots on your body that delicate at first,
use the rhythmic movements of your touch to offer
release and self massage. Use firm to vigorous pressure
as you work throughout your body as an aid to support
your circulatory system and blood flow.

5. STANDING TWIST - 1 MINUTE
Come to standing (or sitting) and allow the arms to
be loose and hanging at your side. Keeping the spine
upright and gently begin to turn and swing the spine
freely left to right (lateral/transverse movement),
letting the arms follow. Do this at a gentle pace but with
enough movement to create a fluid swinging motion.
Lead the movement with the torso, not the arms. At the
completion on the time, allow the body to slow down
naturally and come to a stillness, try not to abruptly halt
the twisting movement.

139

JUST BREATHE

6. FOLDED FEATHER - 1 MINUTE
Whether sitting or standing, begin to allow the body to
fold forward to where the head is lower than your heart,
creating the need for the blood to circulate and pump in
an opposite direction. By doing this we are allowing the
cardiovascular system to refresh blood throughout the
body while simultaneously allowing the back fascial line
and posterior muscular system of the body to stretch
and length. Bend your knees generously, this will help
to alleviate lower back pain while sitting and create
traction of the spine for supporting spine structure in
stillness. While upside down, you might like to sway from
side to side.

7. LOW SQUAT - 1 MINUTE
Widen your stance and turn the feet out at forty five
degrees. Lower yourself to a squat position with your
hands on the ground for balance if needed. If your heels
do not touch the floor, stay supported with hands or
use propped supported to make this position more
accessible. If steady, add simple movements to create
stretch and space in the inner groin and hips.

8. LONG LUNGES - 1 MINUTE
From the folded feather, step one leg back to a low
lunge position keeping one or both hands on the floor.
Start by allowing your back knee to soften to the floor.
You can choose to tuck or untuck your back foot for
support or comfort. Once in position, begin to let the
pelvis draw forward helping to stretch and elongate the
hip flexor on the back leg. You can choose to deepen
this lunge as is suits you and have the option of lifting
the back knee if that is conducive to your stretch.
Switch legs half way through the time.
From a seated position, adjust your seat so that one leg
can extend backwards while still maintaining your seat
on the chair.

140

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

9. SEATED STRETCHING - 1 MINUTE
Finish your practice in a seated position, either in a
chair, or on the floor cross legged. Start by placing your
hands on your knees and circling your spine clockwise,
and then counter clockwise. You may choose to add in
side stretches or forward folds to complete the time.

10. NERVOUS SYSTEM RESET - 1 MINUTE
The final moment is for release and reset of the vagus
nerve. Use the technique lying down, however optional
to sit or stand if preferred or required.
For this sequence it is recommended to use this
technique while sitting.
Take a moment before you begin the technique to
rotate the head left and right to become aware of any
pain or discomfort. Use the Nervous System Reset
technique to realign the cervical spine and reset the
vagus nerve.
This is our final movement in preparation of practice.

UPON COMPLETE OF THE GENTLE 10, YOU ARE NOW READY FOR YOUR SEATED PRACTICE

141

JUST BREATHE

ABC123
breathwork
sequence
method
In this section we look at a variety of technical methods
for creating and practicing breathwork. This system of
approach aims to give clarity and comprehension for
‘how to’ create a well practiced sequence.

142

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

Planning a breathwork practice
This framework will share a recommended approach for all
lengths of practice.
For basic practices, always use one simple and clear
technique to offer a valuable breathing practice. Often
times, the simplicity is the best approach. If you have more
time, or want to offer more our recommendation is to plan
your practice using the ‘rule of three’. Studies have shown
that when we have more than one concept or technique to
practice, the optimum amount of new techniques we can
manage well is up to three. Therefore, our approach for
practice planning maximises what we can do when three
concepts, techniques or variations are offered in
different ways.

ABC Method
A vertical planning that utilises one technique with three
variations.
123 Method
A horizontal planning approach that utilises three
techniques with no variation.
ABC123 Method
A combined planning approach that works well for longer
practices to offer more diversity in your practice, without
complexity or complication.
Recommended:
0-5 minutes - Basic Practice
5-20 minutes - Vertical, Horizontal, Combined
20-60 minutes - Combined

1 Technique

Basic

A-B-C

Vertical

1-2-3

Horizontal

A-B-C-1-2-3

Combined

PRE-PRACTICE CHECKLIST
Before you start guiding a practice, ensure you
go through the pre-practice checklist with your
students. Your pre-practice check list is a reminder
of the essential things you need to do before you
start a practice.

1.

Find a quiet corner

2. Remove any obvious distractions
3. Create a supportive and held environment
4. Settle into stillness
5. Begin with intention

143

JUST BREATHE

ABC
Method
Vertical
Practice
This method is a simple approach to transforming any
breathwork technique into a meaningful practice. While every
individual technique can serve as a valuable individual practice
on it’s own, often providing purposeful variation can help to
expand the breath experience and focus the intention and
awareness of the practitioner.
The ABC Method is a simple and direct approach to creating a
practice progression. Once you select your technique, based
on the need or recommendation, you can look to offer the same
technique, but with an ABC variation.
In this section, we will explore how you can use these
approaches to create ABC variations of any technique.

144

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

COUNTING VARIATIONS

TOUCH VARIATIONS

When practicing a technique we can vary the
number of breaths we take. For example; in box
breathing, we can change and increase from
4:4:4:4 to 6:6:6:6 or 8:8:8:8 or in cleansing and
clearing breath we could increase from
1 x 30 / 1 x 60 / 1 x 90.

When practicing with touch variation we can use
our hands to create different breath focus. For
example in 3-part breath we can practice, both
hands on belly, one hand of belly and one of chest
and then finally, hands rest in the lap (no touch.)

NUMBER OF ROUNDS VARIATIONS

THE GAZE VARIATIONS

When practicing with rounds variation we can vary
the quantity of repetitive amount of cycles per
technique execution. For example in cleansing &
clearing breath we could change and increase each
round from 1 x 30 / 3 x 30 / 5 x 30.

When practicing with the variations of the gaze, we
are speaking about where the eyes are or how we
place our vision. For example in the even breath,
we can give variation by practicing; eyes open,
narrowed gaze, eyes closed.

SPEED & PACE VARIATIONS

ENERGY & EFFORT VARIATIONS

When practicing with speed & pace we can change
the timing and space between the breaths.
For example in cleansing & clearing breathe we
could change the pace from 1 x 30 slow / 1 x 30
moderate / 1 x 30 fast.

When practicing with energy and effort variations
we can adapt the heat and enthusiasm within the
chosen technique. For example with the extended
exhale breath your could offer options of gentle
exhale, intentional clearing, forced clearing.

NOSE & MOUTH VARIATIONS

SUPPORT VARIATIONS

When practicing with nose & mouth variation we
have the option of directing or redirecting the air
flow. For example, in the interrupted inhale we can
vary the extended exhale from mouth closed, to
mouth open to a sign.

When practicing with support variations we are
offering supportive or held variations. For example
in alternate nostril breathing you practice;
standard offering, non-used hand tucked across
the body in the arm pit, and finally both hands
tucked across the body (with no hands on nose
and practicing subtly.)

VOLUME VARIATIONS

SEAT POSITIONS VARIATIONS

When practicing with volume variation we can alter
the sound or the breath in audible techniques. For
example in the humming breath, we could vary at
volumes of quiet, moderate to loud.

When practicing with a variation in your seat,
is to simply change your seat position. In many
practices you could offer from; seated, reclined or
rested on the floor as a practice progression.

145

JUST BREATHE

Counting variation
ABC PRACTICE: BOX BREATHING

ABC PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

A. 4:4:4:4

•

A.

•

B. 6:6:6:6

•

B.

•

C. 8:8:8:8

•

C.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

•

3 Gratitudes

Rounds variation

146

ABC PRACTICE: CLEANSING & CLEARING

ABC PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

A. 3x 30x

•

A.

•

B. 6 x 30x

•

B.

•

C. 8x 30x

•

C.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

•

3 Gratitudes

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

Speed & pace variation
ABC PRACTICE: CLEANSING & CLEARING

ABC PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

A. 30 x slow

•

A.

•

B. 30x Moderate

•

B.

•

C. 30x Fast

•

C.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

•

3 Gratitudes

Nose & mouth variation
ABC PRACTICE: INTERRUPTED INHALE

ABC PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

A. Mouth Closed

•

A.

•

B. Mouth Open

•

B.

•

C. Audible Sigh

•

C.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

•

3 Gratitudes

147

JUST BREATHE

Volume variation
ABC PRACTICE: HUMMING BREATH

ABC PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

A. Low

•

A.

•

B. Audible

•

B.

•

C. Sound

•

C.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

•

3 Gratitudes

Touch variation

148

ABC PRACTICE: 3 PART BREATH

ABC PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

A. Both hands on belly

•

A.

•

B. 1 hand on belly / 1 hand on chest

•

B.

•

C. No touch

•

C.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

•

3 Gratitudes

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

Gaze variation
ABC PRACTICE: CLEANSING & CLEARING

ABC PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

A. Eyes open

•

A.

•

B. Narrowed gaze

•

B.

•

C. Eyes closed

•

C.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

•

3 Gratitudes

Energy & effort variation
ABC PRACTICE: INTERRUPTED INHALE

ABC PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

A. Passive release

•

A.

•

B. Moderate exhale

•

B.

•

C. Forced effort

•

C.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

•

3 Gratitudes

149

JUST BREATHE

Support variation
ABC PRACTICE: ALTERNATIVE NOSTRIL BREATH

ABC PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

A. Standard

•

A.

•

B. Left hand in right armpit

•

B.

•

C. Both hands in armpits

•

C.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

•

3 Gratitudes

Seat variation

150

ABC PRACTICE: PINHOLE BREATH

ABC PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

A. Seated

•

A.

•

B. Reclined

•

B.

•

C. Rested

•

C.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

•

3 Gratitudes

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK
PROTOCOLS
SUBSECTION
TITLE

‘Do not strive for
perfection, for it is only a
waste of the imagination.’
MICHAEL JAMES WONG

151

JUST BREATHE

123
Method
Horizontal
Practice
The 123 Method is an horizontal approach for planning a
practice. This structure is about combining three different
techniques that all have the same focused awareness.
For this approach it is best to start with a theme or focus,
a reason guiding purpose which can help in technique
selection. Commons themes of calming or stimulating are
helpful intentions to give a clear and direct understanding
of the purpose of the practice.
For the detailed approach, ensure you are not just simply
picking techniques that support your theme, but also
ensure you are sequencing them in an appropriate way.

152

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

Simplify & down regulate
123 PRACTICE:

123 PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breathe

•

Conscious Breathe

•

1. Even breath

•

1.

•

2. Inspired pause

•

2.

•

3. Box breath

•

3.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

•

3 Gratitudes

Stress reduction
123 PRACTICE:

123 PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breathe

•

Conscious Breathe

•

1. P-Sigh

•

1.

•

2. Extended exhale

•

2.

•

3. Even breath

•

3.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

•

3 Gratitudes

153

JUST BREATHE

Focus & concentration
123 PRACTICE:

123 PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breathe

•

Conscious Breathe

•

1. Cleansing & clearing

•

1.

•

2. 3-Part In/Out

•

2.

•

3. Alternate Nostril Breathing (Exhale)

•

3.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

•

3 Gratitudes

Mental resilience

154

123 PRACTICE:

123 PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breathe

•

Conscious Breathe

•

1. Coherent breath

•

1.

•

2. Humming Breath

•

2.

•

3. Inspired Pause (Inhale)

•

3.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

•

3 Gratitudes

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

Cooling & calming
123 PRACTICE:

123 PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breathe

•

Conscious Breathe

•

1. Cooling breath

•

1.

•

2. Extended exhale

•

2.

•

3. Circular alternate nostril left

•

3.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

•

3 Gratitudes

Making space
123 PRACTICE:

123 PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breathe

•

Conscious Breathe

•

1. Diaphragmatic belly breath

•

1.

•

2. Belly/chest breathing

•

2.

•

3. 360 Breathing

•

3.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

•

3 Gratitudes

155

JUST BREATHE

Warming & invigorating
123 PRACTICE:

123 PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breathe

•

Conscious Breathe

•

1. Even breath

•

1.

•

2. Interrupted inhale

•

2.

•

3. Energising breath

•

3.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

•

3 Gratitudes

Energise & up regulate

156

123 PRACTICE:

123 PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breathe

•

Conscious Breathe

•

1. Lions breath

•

1.

•

2. Energising breath

•

2.

•

3. Bellows breath

•

3.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

•

3 Gratitudes

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK
SUBSECTION
PROTOCOLS
TITLE

‘Quiet is the choice to
remove distractions.’
MICHAEL JAMES WONG

157

JUST BREATHE

ABC123
Method
Combined
Practice
This technique combines the ABC Method and the 123
Method to seamlessly offer an approach to planning
a breathwork sequence that has both option and
consideration. When we use the ABC123 Technique we
are creating a blueprint of options that allows us to
plan with purpose.

158

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

ABC123 Method
Combined Practice

The idea here is that you can implement a combination
of vertical and horizontal planning which allows;
•

More purposeful use of time

•

Guidance for longer practices, e.g. 20 - 45 minutes

•

Variety in practice, with reason and consideration

Name or theme of sequence
ABC123 PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breathe

•

1.

•

A.

•

B.

•

C.

•

2.

•

A.

•

B.

•

C.

•

3.

•

A.

•

B.

•

C.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

159

JUST BREATHE

The power of the pause - balancing practice
ABC123 PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breathe

•

1. Box breath (count variation)

•

A. 4:4:4:4 X 8

•

B. 6:6:6:6 X 8

•

C. 8:8:8:8 X 8

•

2. Inspired pause (no count)

•

A.

•

B.

•

C.

•

3. Alternate nostril breath (no count)

•

A.

•

B.

•

C.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

NOTES

160

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

Release and reset - calming practice
ABC123 PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breathe

•

1. P-Sigh x 5

•

A.

•

B.

•

C.

•

2. Triangle breathe (count variation)

•

A. Inspired pause x 8

•

B. 4:4:4 X 8

•

C. 4:7:8 X 8

•

3. Humming breath (volume variation)

•

A. Soft whisper x 3

•

B. Audible hum x 3

•

C. Loud x 3

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

NOTES

161

JUST BREATHE

A gentle unwinding - softening practice
ABC123 PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breathe

•

1. Alternate Nostril Breathe (Support variation)

•

A. Alternate Nostril Breathe x 4

•

B. Opp Alternate Nostril Breath Exhale x 4

•

C. Circular Alternate Nostril Breath x 4

•

2. Extended Exhale

•

A.

•

B.

•

C.

•

3. 3-Part Breath Inhale - Exhale (Seat variation)

•

A. Seated x 4

•

B. Reclined x 4

•

C. Rested x 4

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

NOTES

162

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

Making space - cleansing & clearing practice
ABC123 PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breathe

•

1. Cleansing & Clearing Breath (Speed variation)

•

A. Slow 3 x 30x

•

B. Moderate 3 x 30x

•

C. Fast 3 x 30x

•

2. Lion’s Breath (Energy variation)

•

A. Gentle x 3x

•

B. Moderate x 3x

•

C. Loud x 3x

•

3. Interrupted Inhale (Nose & mouth variation)

•

A. Nose Exhale x 3x

•

B. Mouth Exhale x 3x

•

C. Sigh Exhale x 3x

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

NOTES

163

JUST BREATHE

Inviting the inhale - inspiring & uplifting practice
ABC123 PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breathe

•

1. Bellow Breath (Round variation)

•

A. 1 x 30x

•

B. 3 x 30x

•

C. 5 x 30x

•

2. Interrupted Inhale x 8x

•

A.

•

B.

•

C.

•

3. Opposite Alternate Nostril Inhale x 8x

•

A.

•

B.

•

C.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

NOTES

164

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

Expanding the exhale - grounding practice
ABC123 PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breathe

•

1. Pinhole Breath (No count)

•

A.

•

B.

•

C.

•

2. Interrupted Exhale (Count variation)

•

A. 4:4 x 8

•

B. 4:6 x 8x

•

C. 4:8 x 8x

•

3. Alternate Nostril Breath x 8x

•

A.

•

B.

•

C.

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

NOTES

165

JUST BREATHE

Rise & energise - stimulating practice
ABC123 PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breathe

•

1. Energising Breath x 12x

•

A.

•

B.

•

C.

•

2. Cleansing & Clearing Moderate Speed 3 x 30x (Touch variation)

•

A. Using hands to pump

•

B. Light touch

•

C. No hands

•

3. Interrupted Inhale (Count variation)

•

A. 4:4 x 4x

•

B. 6:4 x 4x

•

C. 8:4 x 4x

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

NOTES

166

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

Awakening the breath - empowering practice
ABC123 PRACTICE:

•

Just Breathe Invitation

•

Stillness

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Observe the breath

•

Conscious Breathe

•

1. Even Breath (Gaze variation)

•

A. Narrow gaze

•

B. Tip of the nose

•

C. Inward gaze

•

2. Bellow Breath 3 x 30x

•

A.

•

B.

•

C.

•

3. Rise & Fall Inhale (Count variation)

•

A. 4:1:4:1 x 4x

•

B. 6:1:4:1 x 4x

•

C. 8:2:4:1 x 4x

•

D. 6:1:4:1 x 4x

•

E. 4:1:4:1 x 4x

•

Conscious Breath

•

Cultivate Awareness

•

Stillness

•

3 Gratitudes

NOTES

167

JUST BREATHE

Breathwork
Protocols
Nervous System
Response Techniques

Stress happens, it’s a natural part of being
human. Our Just Breathe Breathwork
Protocols is an easy and immediate 3-step
method to help manage the moment and
reduce your stress state.

Name it
Tame it
Sustain it

Learn these six essential breathing exercises to help
regulate the nervous system and shift your breath
pattern for the better.
Nervous System Response Techniques (NSRT) are fast
and effect tools to utilise anytime you need a moment to
Just Breathe. Understanding how stress effects you is
important, but knowing how to support it is essential.

FIND OUT MORE @JUSTBREATHE
OR VISIT JUSTBREATHEPROJECT.COM

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

Breathwork Protocols
Nervous System Response Techniques
Step 1: Name It

Start by identifying what is creating stress in your day, this helps assess
the best responsive practice

S

T

R

E

S

S

SITUATIONAL
OCCURRENCE

TIME
SENSITIVITY

RESPONSIBILITY
& OBLIGATION

EMOTIONAL
TRIGGERS

SOCIETAL
EXPECTATIONS

SLEEP
DEPRIVATION

Step 2: Tame it

Utilize NSRT breathwork protocol to reduce your state of stress

BALANCED BREATHING

DOWN REGULATION

UP REGULATION

RESTORATIVE BREATHING

CTS

PXC

E3J

3XV

Even Breath
Triangle Breath
Box Breath

Physiological Sigh
Extended Exhale
Coherent Breathing

Energising
3-Part Inhale
Breath of Joy

Circle/Triangle/Square
BASIC
BREATHING EXERCISE

Extended Exhale Var.
Low Frequency Humming
Pinhole Breath
Audible Sigh

STRESS RESPONSE
BREATHING EXERCISE

ENERGISING
BREATHING EXERCISE

SLEEP RESPONSE
BREATHING EXERCISE

360° IPA

XLT

3CC

CAP

360 Breath
Inspired Pause
Alternate Nostril Breath

Extended Exhale
Low Frequency Humming
Triangle 4-7-8

Cleansing & Clearing
Slow
Medium
Fast

Coherent Breathing
Alternate Nostril Breathing
Pinhole Breath

REGULATED
BREATHING EXERCISE

CALMING
BREATHING EXERCISE

WARMING
BREATHING EXERCISE

RELAXATION
BREATHING EXERCISE

Step 3: Sustain it

Use these breathwork protocols to stimulate your parasympathetic rest response

R

E

S

T

REDUCE

EXTERNAL

STIMULUS

OVER TIME
169

JUST BREATHE

CTS (Circle/Triangle/Square)
Basic breathing exercise
Optimize autonomic balance:
a core breathing protocol

Establish a solid foundation for your breath with this foundational practice.
Incorporating even breath, triangle breath, and box breath (remember this using
the acronym ‘circle, triangle, square’ in reflection of the breathing patterns), this
sequence promotes respiratory efficiency and overall balance. By syncing your
inhalation and exhalation, you can cultivate a sense of evenness while optimizing
oxygen intake.

Even Breath

Triangle Breathing

Box Breathing

The steady inhalation and exhalation of
equal duration. A straightforward practice
that helps to soothe both body and mind. A
technique to help slow down the breathing
cycle and down regulate the nervous
system. Even breathing is a comprehensive
baseline for all techniques.

A three part technique that helps slow down
the breathing cycle and down regulate the
nervous system. Triangle breathing focuses
evenly on the inhale, pause at the top of the
breath and the exhale. This pattern is known
to help with stress and anxiousness.

A breathing technique in which all four parts
of the breath (inhalation, internal retention,
exhalation, external retention) are all of
equal length. Reduces physical stress
symptoms and increases mental clarity.

HOW TO:

HOW TO:

HOW TO:

1. Find a comfortable seat

1. Find a comfortable seat

1. Find a comfortable seat

2. Notice the current pace of the breath
3. Take a conscious breath to begin

2. Notice the current pace of the breath,
regardless the state

2. Notice the current pace of the breath
Take a conscious breath to begin

4. Breathe in slowly for the count of 4

3. Take a conscious breath to begin

3. Breathe in slowly for the count of 4

5. Take a natural pause at the top of the
inhale

4. Breathe in slowly for the count of 3
seconds or slow counting

4. Hold the breath at the top for the
count of 4

6. Exhale to the count of 4 seconds

5. Pause at the top of the inhale for 3
seconds or slow counting

5. Exhale slowly to the count of 4

7. Repeat as needed

6. Exhale slowly for the count of 3 seconds
or slow counting
7. Repeat this for 10-12 rounds or 2 minutes

6. Hold the breath at the bottom for the
count of 4
7. Repeat as needed

8. If a 3 count patterns feels too short/long
or not supportive, increase or decrease
to a count that creates calm and ease
9. Once completed, release the technique
and return to a natural breathing pattern
2 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

5 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

10 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

3 x rounds: Even Breath

5 x rounds: Even Breath

10 x rounds: Even Breath

3 x rounds: Triangle Breathing

5 x rounds: Triangle Breathing

10 x rounds: Triangle Breathing

3 x rounds: Box Breathing

5 x rounds: Box Breathing

10 x rounds: Box Breathing

170

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

360° IPA
Balanced breathing exercise
Return to homeostatis:
a sustained balance
breathing protocol

This protocol is to help return the breath to balance or maintain a balanced
homeostasis. These techniques help to regulate the autonomic nervous system,
enhance oxygenation, and promote mental clarity. Balanced breathing reduces
stress, improves focus, and cultivates overall equilibrium.

360 Breathing

Inspired Pause

Alternate Nostril Breathing

This circumferential technique is a focused
variation of belly/chest breathing that
emphasises full torso breath capacity. Use
360 degree breathing to encourage a full
breath, oxygen distribution and rib cage
expansion.

This technique focuses on slowing the
oxygen intake and exhalation. A significant
and intentional pause aims to create a
sense of non-physical ease, slow the heart
rate down and expand the lung capacity.

Breath practice in which each nostril
is alternately used for inhalation and
exhalation. Calms nervous system, balances
masculine and feminine energy, balances
left and right hemisphere of the brain,
fosters mental clarity and cultivates ability
to concentrate.

HOW TO:

HOW TO:

HOW TO:

1. Find a comfortable seat

1. Find a comfortable seat

1. Find a comfortable seat

2. Place one hand on the belly, one hand on
the chest

2. Take a conscious breath to begin
Breathe in slowly filling the breath to
a comfortable and manageable level
Without force, pause the breath

2. Take your right hand and lift up to
your nose

3. Breathe slowly and fully into both belly
and chest equally, feeling both hands rise
and expand
4. Focus on expanding evenly in a 360
degree direction
5. Pause at the top of the breath for 1
second
6. Exhale slowly letting the belly and
chest empty

3. Hold for the count of 2
4. Exhale gently
5. Increase/decrease pause/hold count as
preferred
6. Repeat as needed

3. Cover your right nostril with your thumb
and take a long slow inhale through your
left nostril
4. Use your right ring finger to close
off your left nostril at the same time
releasing the right
5. Exhale through your right nostril, pause
briefly at the end of the exhale, then
inhale again through the right nostril
6. Close off your right nostril, open your left
and exhale through the left

7. Repeat as needed

7. This is one round, complete for several
rounds of breath

2 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

5 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

10 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

3 x rounds: 360 Breathing

5 x rounds: 360 Breathing

10 rounds: 360 Breathing

3 x rounds: Inspired Pause

5 x rounds: Inspired Pause

10 rounds: Inspired Pause

3 x rounds: Alternate Nostril Breathing

5 x rounds: Alternate Nostril Breathing

10 rounds: Alternate Nostril Breathing

171

JUST BREATHE

PXC
Stress response
breathing exercise
Dissolve stress:
a breath-based protocol

Respond to stress, anxiety, overwhelm or over stimulation with this rapid stress
relief protocol and targeted breathing sequence. Combining the physiological
sigh, extended exhale, and coherent breathing, this breathing protocol effectively
activates the body's relaxation response by down regulating the sympathetic
nervous system.

Physiological Sigh (P-Sigh)

Extended Exhale

Coherent Breathing

The physiological sigh, or often called the
cyclic sigh (when done in succession) is a
simple and effective down regulating stress
response.

This technique helps to quickly down
regulate and activate the parasympathetic
nervous system. It is a slow controlled
technique where the exhale is longer
than the inhale with no breath-holding in
between. Helps with relaxation and tension
decompression.

Coherent breathing is to breath at a rate
of 5.5 breaths per minute, which generally
translates into inhaling and exhaling to the
count of 5.5 seconds. The purpose of this
type of breathing is to increase heart rate
variability.

HOW TO:

HOW TO:

HOW TO:

1. Notice the current state of your breath

1. Breathe slowly to a comfortably full level

2. Take a first full sharp inhale through the
nose

2. No pause needed

1. Breathe naturally as you usually do, just
slower and with breath awareness

3. Take a second sharp inhale through
the nose filling the intake to maximum
capacity
4. Pause at the top
5. Open the mouth and sigh with an
extended exhale

3. Exhale long, slow and deep with an
extended exhalation

2. Inhale for 5 seconds

4. Repeat as needed

4. Repeat 6 times for a 1 minute round

Variations:
Mouth closed/open or audible sigh

3. Exhale for another 5 seconds
5. Repeat as needed

6. Repeat as needed

2 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

5 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

10 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

3 x rounds: Physiological Sigh (P-Sigh)

5 x rounds:Physiological Sigh (P-Sigh)

10 x rounds: Physiological Sigh (P-Sigh)

3 x rounds: Extended Exhale

5 x rounds: Extended Exhale

10 x rounds: Extended Exhale

3 x rounds: Coherent Breathing

5 x rounds: Coherent Breathing

10 x rounds: Coherent Breathing

172

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

XLT
Calming breathing exercise
Sustained rest: a breathbased restoration protocol

Experience a scientifically-validated approach to stress management through
this breathing practice. Combining extended exhale, low frequency humming
breath and 4-7-8 breathing techniques, this protocol targets the body's
stress response. By influencing the autonomic nervous system and promoting
oxygenation, these exercises can induce a state a calming response and a
parasympathetic activation.

Extended Exhale

Low Frequency Humming Breath Triangle Breathing 4-7-8 Variation

This technique helps to quickly down
regulate and activate the parasympathetic
nervous system. It is a slow controlled
technique where the exhale is longer
than the inhale with no breath-holding in
between. Helps with relaxation and tension
decompression.

A gentle down regulation technique. The
vibrations from this breathing technique
are known to soothe the nervous system
and to free the mind of agitation.

An inverted variation of triangle breathing
with a elongated focus on the inhalation
pause and exhalation. This calming and
down regulating technique is an effective
way of managing anxiety and quelling errant
stress responses.

HOW TO:

HOW TO:

HOW TO:

1. Breathe slowly to a comfortably full level

1.

Gently place the thumbs over each
tragus, applying gentle pressure

1. Use the triangle breathing technique
above as the foundation

3. Exhale long, slow and deep with an
extended exhalation

2.

Allow the rest of your fingers to rest
naturally along your forehead

2. Inhale for the count of 4 slow counting

4. Repeat as needed

3.

With mouth closed take a slow breath
in to full capacity

Variations:
Mouth closed/open or audible sigh

4.

As you exhale slowly create a gentle
humming sound

5.

Repeat as needed

2. No pause needed

3. Pause and hold the breath for 7 slow
counting Exhale for the slow count of 8
4. Repeat as needed

Variations:
Use index finger to seal ear canals to
heighten the sensory experience and focus

2 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

5 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

10 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

3 x rounds: Extended Exhale

5 x rounds:Extended Exhale

10 x rounds: Extended Exhale

3 x rounds: Low Frequency Humming Breath

5 x rounds: Low Frequency Humming Breath

10 x rounds: Low Frequency Humming Breath

3 x rounds: Triangle Breathing 4-7-8 Variation

5 x rounds: Triangle Breathing 4-7-8 Variation

10 x rounds: Triangle Breathing 4-7-8 Variation

173

JUST BREATHE

E3J
Energising breath exercise
Ignite your energy: a breathbased boost protocol

Experience a surge of vitality with this energising breathing practice. By
combining energising breath, three-part inhale and exhale breathing, and
breath of joy, this sequence is designed to stimulate the body's energy systems.
Increase oxygen intake, enhance focus, and elevate mood through the power of
your breath.

Energising Breath

3-Part Interrupted Inhale

Breath of Joy

In this technique the epiglottis is
constricted, in order to wash the breath
across the back of the throat, helping to
regulate the breath, warms and energises
the body and calms the mind.

Brief pauses are taken during the inhale.
The practice introduces the concept of
expanding the length and capacity of the
inhalation.

A dynamic technique designed to
invigorate the body and uplift the sensation
response in the body. Deep inhalations are
accompanied by vigorous arm movements,
followed by forceful exhalations through
the mouth. This rhythmic breathing pattern
floods the body with oxygen, awakening
the senses and energising the mind. It
releases tension, enhances circulation, and
promotes mental clarity.

HOW TO:

HOW TO:

HOW TO:

1. With the mouth closed, take a full
inhalation through the nose to fill up

1. Find a comfortable seat or reclined
position Start with a diaphragmatic
inhale filling the lungs to just one third of
their capacity

1. Stand with your feet shoulder width
apart, knees slightly bent

2. As you exhale with a closed mouth, force
the air forced and out against the back of
the teeth and lips.

2. Take a short pause

3. This will create a cyclical flow of air from
the inhale to the exhale.

3. Fill the costal region with a second inhale
Take a short pause

4. The forced movement of the air will
create a warming and energising effect

4. Fill the final third clavicular region, or
until the lungs are full with air

5. Repeat as needed

5. Take a final short pause
6. Exhale slowly completely
7. Repeat as needed

2. Inhale one third of the breath through
your nose as you swing your arms
forward and up overhead Inhale two
thirds of the breath through your nose
as you swing your arms out to the side
3. Inhale to full capacity through your nose
as you swing your arms forward and up
overhead
4. Take a big exhale through your mouth to
the sound of 'ha' (or forced sigh) as you
bend your knees and fold forward, arms
move back
5. Repeat as needed

2 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

5 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

10 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

3 x rounds: Energising Breath

5 x rounds: Energising Breath

10 x rounds: Energising Breath

3 x rounds: 3-Part Interrupted Inhale

5 x rounds: 3-Part Interrupted Inhale

10 x rounds: 3-Part Interrupted Inhale

3 x rounds: Breath of Joy

5 x rounds: Breath of Joy

10 x rounds: Breath of Joy

174

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

3CC
Warming breath exercise
Accelerate circulation:
increase metabolic rate
protocol

Using the breath to generate internal heat, this protocol incorporates cleansing
and clearing breath performed at varying intensities to stimulate circulation,
increase core temperature, and promote detoxification. By modulating the
rhythm and pace of this technique, you can effectively target different circulatory
channels, increase metabolic rate and stimulate your innate heating capacity.

Cleansing & Clearing Breath
Slow Variation

Cleansing & Clearing Breath
Medium Variation

Cleansing & Clearing Breath
Fast Variation

Start slowly with a breathing technique
in which the exhalation is active and the
inhalation is passive. Creating heat in the
body and strengthening the abdomen, as
well as aiding digestion and clearing the
nadis.

The second variation elevates the speed
to a medium pace wit the same active
exhalation and passive inhalation. The
medium speed is adjusted to elevate the
effort and build continued heat and energy.

The final variation is fast, but relative
to what is manageable. This fast paced
should be quick by still succinct with effect
execution of the technique. The fast paced
is to create more substantial heat and
heightened effort.

HOW TO:

HOW TO:

HOW TO:

1. Find a comfortable seat
2. Bring your awareness to your lower belly
3. Take a long breath in through your nose
4. Contract the muscles in the abdomen
in quick but regulated succession to
force out short exhalations, for the slow
variation exhale once every 2 seconds
5. The inhalation will be a passive reaction
to your active exhalation, for the slow
variation inhale once every 2 seconds
6. Repeat as needed

1. Find a comfortable seat
2. Bring your awareness to your lower belly
3. Take a long breath in through your nose
4. Contract the muscles in the abdomen
in quick but regulated succession to
force out short exhalations, for the slow
variation exhale once every 1 second
5. The inhalation will be a passive reaction
to your active exhalation, for the slow
variation inhale once every 1 second
6. Repeat as needed

1. Find a comfortable seat
2. Bring your awareness to your lower belly
3. Take a long breath in through your nose
4. Contract the muscles in the abdomen
in quick but regulated succession to
force out short exhalations, for the slow
variation exhale once every 0.5 second
5. The inhalation will be a passive reaction
to your active exhalation, for the slow
variation inhale once every 0.5 second
6. Repeat as needed

2 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

5 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

10 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

3 x rounds: Cleansing & Clearing Breath (S)

5 x rounds: Cleansing & Clearing Breath (S)

10 x rounds: Cleansing & Clearing Breath (S)

3 x rounds: Cleansing & Clearing Breath (M)

5 x rounds: Cleansing & Clearing Breath (M)

10 x rounds: Cleansing & Clearing Breath (M)

3 x rounds: Cleansing & Clearing Breath (F)

5 x rounds: Cleansing & Clearing Breath (F)

10 x rounds: Cleansing & Clearing Breath (F)

175

JUST BREATHE

3XV
Sleep response
breathing exercise
Deep rest: a sleep-enhancing
breathwork protocol

Deep Rest is a scientifically validated breathwork protocol designed to enhance
sleep quality and can significantly reduce physiological arousal, lower cortisol
levels and promote relaxation. Optimize your body's natural sleep-wake cycle and
experience improved sleep quality, leading to greater overall well-being.

Low Frequency Humming Breath Pinhole Breath

Audible Sigh

A gentle down regulation technique. The
vibrations from this breathing technique
are known to soothe the nervous system
and to free the mind of agitation.

The pinhole breath is a technique that is
effectively used to slow down the exhalation,
down regulate the nervous system and
reduce real time stress.

This technique helps to quickly down
regulate and activate the parasympathetic
nervous system. It is a slow controlled
technique where the exhale is longer
than the inhale with no breath-holding in
between. Helps with relaxation and tension
decompression.

HOW TO:

HOW TO:

HOW TO:

1.

Gently place the thumbs over each
tragus, applying gentle pressure

1.

Notice the breath without changing it

1. Breathe slowly to a comfortably full level

2.

Take a full inhale through the nose

Allow the rest of your fingers to rest
naturally along your forehead

2. No pause needed

3.

Part your lips slightly

4.

Exhale out slowly through your lips like
exhaling through a small pinhole

3. Exhale long, slow and deep with an
extended exhalation

5.

Pause at the end of the breath

6.

Repeat as needed

2.
3.

With mouth closed take a slow breath
in to full capacity

4.

As you exhale slowly create a gentle
humming sound

5.

Repeat as needed

4. Repeat as needed

Variations:
This technique should be practiced as a
variation of extended exhale

Variations:
This technique should be practiced as a
variation of extended exhale

Variations:
This technique should be an extended
exhale with a mouth open audible sigh

2 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

5 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

10 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

3 x rounds: Low Frequency Humming Breath

5 x rounds: Low Frequency Humming Breath

10 x rounds: Low Frequency Humming Breath

3 x rounds: Pinhole Breath

5 x rounds: Pinhole Breath

10 x rounds: Pinhole Breath

3 x rounds: Extended Exhale

5 x rounds: Extended Exhale

10 x rounds: Extended Exhale

176

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

CAP
Relaxation breathing exercise
Serenity: reduction of stimulus
for optimal restoration

Excessive sensory stimulation can disrupt the body's natural relaxation response
and hinder restorative processes. This breathwork protocol designed to
minimize external stimuli, creating an optimal environment for relaxation and
rejuvenation. By reducing sensory input, this practice can effectively promote a
state of deep relaxation, lower stress hormones, and optimize the body's ability
to repair and recover.

Coherent Breathing

Alternate Nostril Breathing

Pinhole Breath

Coherent breathing is to breath at a rate
of 5.5 breaths per minute, which generally
translates into inhaling and exhaling to the
count of 5.5 seconds. The purpose of this
type of breathing is to increase heart rate
variability.

Breath practice in which each nostril
is alternately used for inhalation and
exhalation. Calms nervous system, balances
masculine and feminine energy, balances
left and right hemisphere of the brain,
fosters mental clarity and cultivates ability
to concentrate.

The pinhole breath is a technique that is
effectively used to slow down the exhalation,
down regulate the nervous system and
reduce real time stress.

HOW TO:

HOW TO:

HOW TO:

1. Breathe naturally as you usually do, just
slower and with breath awareness

1. Find a comfortable seat

1.

Notice the breath without changing it

2. Take your right hand and lift up to
your nose

2.

Take a full inhale through the nose

3.

Part your lips slightly

3. Cover your right nostril with your thumb
and take a long slow inhale through your
left nostril

4.

Exhale out slowly through your lips like
exhaling through a small pinhole

5.

Pause at the end of the breath

4. Use your right ring finger to close
off your left nostril at the same time
releasing the right

6.

Repeat as needed

2. Inhale for 5 seconds
3. Exhale for another 5 seconds
4. Repeat 6 times for a 1 minute round
5. Repeat as needed

5. Exhale through your right nostril, pause
briefly at the end of the exhale, then
inhale again through the right nostril
6. Close off your right nostril, open your left
and exhale through the left
7. This is one round, complete for several
rounds of breath

2 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

5 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

10 MINUTE BREATHING PROTOCOL

3 x rounds: Coherent Breathing

5 x rounds: Coherent Breathing

10 x rounds: Coherent Breathing

3 x rounds: Alternate Nostril Breathing

5 x rounds: Alternate Nostril Breathing

10 x rounds: Alternate Nostril Breathing

3 x rounds: Pinhole Breath

5 x rounds: Pinhole Breath

10 x rounds: Pinhole Breath

177

JUST BREATHE

Breathwork protocols
Nervous System Response Techniques
BALANCED BREATHING
PROTOCOL

FUNCTION

CTS
Circle/
Triangle/
Square

360°
IPA

Basic breathing exercise

Direct response

Grounding exercise

Gradual response

TECHNIQUES

LENGTH

1. Even Breath

3-5 rounds

2. Triangle Breath

3-5 rounds

3. Box Breath

3-5 rounds

1. 360 Breath

3-5 rounds

2. Inspired Pause

3-5 rounds

3. Alternate Nostril Breathing

3-5 rounds

1. Physiological Sigh

3-5 rounds

2. Extended Exhale Breath

3-5 rounds

3. Coherent Breathing

3-5 rounds

1. Extended Exhale Breath

3-5 rounds

2. Low Frequency Humming Breath

3-5 rounds

3. Triangle Breathing 4-7-8

3-5 rounds

1. Energising Breath

3-5 rounds

2. 3-Part Inhale & Exhale

3-5 rounds

3. Breath of Joy

3-5 rounds

1. Cleansing & Clearing - Slow

3-5 rounds

2. Cleansing & Clearing - Medium

3-5 rounds

3. Cleansing & Clearing - Fast

3-5 rounds

1. Ext Ex Var: Low Frequency Humming

3-5 rounds

2. Ext Ex Var: Pinhole Breath

3-5 rounds

3. Ext Ex Var: Audible Sigh

3-5 rounds

1. Coherent Breathing

3-5 rounds

2. Alternate Nostril Breathing

3-5 rounds

3. Pinhole Breath

3-5 rounds

DOWN REGULATION
Stress response exercise

PXC
Direct response

Calming exercise

XLT
Gradual response

UP REGULATION
Energising breath

E3J
Direct response

Warming exercise

3CC
Gradual response

RESTORATIVE BREATHING
Sleep response

3XV
Direct response

Relaxation exercise

CAP
Gradual response

178

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

breathe better,
stress less,
just breathe

179

JUST BREATHE

Exhale
A Signature
Just Breathe
Practice

Exhale is our Just Breathe signature practice that combines
breathwork, meditation and deepest into a set sequence
for personal and shared practice. This practice is our go-to
practice for down regulation and a deeply restful moment for
the body and nervous system.

180

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

Exhale
Exhale is our Just Breathe signature practice that
combines breathwork, meditation and deepest into a set
sequence for personal and shared practice. This practice is
our go-to practice for down regulation and a deeply restful
moment for the body and nervous system.
Created by Michael himself, he uses this practice as his
personal daily practice and recommended go to practice
to support your mind and mental health.

BEGIN WITH

This sequence can be done as a 10 minute, 20 minute or
45 minute practice. It is recommended this practice is
done 20 minutes twice a day, or 45 minutes once a day.
This sequence has proven itself to be highly effective in
managing stress and hyper stimulation, balancing the
oxygen and carbon dioxide distribution and shifting the
focus of our breath towards and extended and audible
exhalation.

Just Breathe Invitation
Start in stillness
Cultivate awareness
Observe the breath
Conscious breath or Physiological sigh

PRACTICE

10 MINUTES

20 MINUTES

45 MINUTES

XLT Breathwork Protocol

5 minutes

10 minutes

20 minutes

Extended Exhale

5x

10 x

20 x

Humming Breath

5x

10 x

20 x

Triangle Breathing 4-7-8

5x

10 x

20 x

Meditation

5 minutes

10 minutes

20 minutes

+ 1 minute
(as needed)

+ 2 minutes
(as needed)

5 minutes

Just Breathe Being Meditation

Deep Rest
Stillness

CLOSE WITH

Conscious breath or physiological sigh
Observe the breath
Cultivate awareness
Finish in stillness
3 Gratitudes

181

JUST BREATHE

Full Unwinding

Gentle 10 + Exhale
= Full Unwinding Practice
Unwinding is a comprehensive practice that combines gentle
movement exercises, breathwork, meditation and deep rest.
This 60 minute practice is complete sequence that alleviate
fatigue and physical tension in the body and allows the body the
space and mobility to sit steadily in stillness during an extended
practice. This nourishing and supportive practice aids in deep
release during a sitting practice and is considered a holistic
practice for the five layers of our being state; physical, energetic,
mental, emotional, resting.

182

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

A complete practice of : Movement
Breathwork
Meditation
Deep Rest

BEGIN WITH

FULL GUIDED

Opening Invitation

All movements, techniques and practices guided in full

PRACTICE

TYPE

TIME

Gentle 10

10 stretches for stillness

10 minutes

Breathwork

Exhale ABC123 Practice

20 minutes

Meditation

Just Breathe Meditation

20 minutes

Deep Rest

Reclined in stillness

10 minutes

TOTAL TIME 60 MINUTES

CLOSE WITH

3 gratitudes

NOTES

183

JUST BREATHE

Full Unwinding
Extended
Version
3 Rounds
3 hour Practice
When practiced consecutively for
multiple rounds, with no breaks or
interruptions, Unwinding has the ability
to move participates into a deep state of
conscious transcendence.
When beginning this practice, it’s best to
have safe guidance, but once familiar, this
practice can be practiced as an individual
and solitary dedication to one’s own inner
peace and quiet connection. In some
situations, Unwinding can be practiced in
a group setting during deep immersions,
silent retreats, training curriculums or
gatherings of fellow teachers.

184

This three hour practice is a journey of deep transcendence.
Through three rounds of unwinding, we are moving the
body deeper and deeper into self awareness and stillness.
Each round serves a unique purpose, the first is to round of
intention, to move inward with purpose. The second round
is for attention, the task to stay in your practice and start
to move into the space beyond the coherent mind. The
third round, is the round of connection into the state of
transcendence.
This full practice of unwinding is a powerful practice to
help return us to the state of our truest being through the
process of un-doing.

NSRT SEQUENCES & BREATHWORK PROTOCOLS

BEGIN WITH

ROUND 1 - FULL GUIDED

Opening Invitation

All movements, techniques and practices guided in full

PRACTICE

TYPE

TIME

Gentle 10

10 stretches for stillness

10 minutes

Breathwork

Exhale ABC123 Practice

20 minutes

Meditation

Just Breathe Meditation

20 minutes

Deep Rest

Reclined in stillness

10 minutes

TOTAL TIME 60 MINUTES

ROUND 2 - GENTLY GUIDED

Section transitions only

PRACTICE

TYPE

TIME

Gentle 10

10 stretches for stillness

10 minutes

Breathwork

Exhale ABC123 Practice

20 minutes

Meditation

Just Breathe Meditation

20 minutes

Deep Rest

Reclined in stillness

10 minutes

TOTAL TIME 60 MINUTES

ROUND 3 - SELF-GUIDED

Timer only

PRACTICE

TYPE

TIME

Gentle 10

10 stretches for stillness

10 minutes

Breathwork

Exhale ABC123 Practice

20 minutes

Meditation

Just Breathe Meditation

20 minutes

Deep Rest

Reclined in stillness

10 minutes

TOTAL TIME 60 MINUTES

CLOSE WITH

3 gratitudes

185

JUST BREATHE

186

5

SUBSECTION TITLE

Principles
of guidance
Techniques & insights
for sharing the practice

187

JUST BREATHE

Creating an
experience

Whether it’s a one-to-one session, a group practice or a moment
of sharing a technique, creating an experience is an important
part of any practice.
Essential practices help respond to a need state, and good
intentions and proper techniques while help to ensure it’s value.
Cultivation and refinement are necessary components of equal
measure to technical execution and commitment.

188

PRINCIPLES OF GUIDANCE

Consent,
consideration & care

When guiding a breathwork or meditation practice,
consent and consideration are two important aspects that
fall into our duty of care. These are needed when asking
someone to be guided because it respects the idea that
we are all uniquely different and our bodies, breath and
practice are not something to take for granted.

What does consent look like?

Consent is something asked of your participant. It
can be as simple as asking someone’s permission to
participate, and by doing this we do not assume their
state of mind or physical state. This gives each person
personal agency and choice in the experience to come.
Often it will be necessary to explain what your practice
will entail and this will allow individual to know the
conditions of the offering.

What is consideration?

Consideration if your approach and duty of care for
the people you are guiding. This means we must make
it personal, not generic. We must plan accordingly and
have both skill and intellect in our design and delivery,
but we must also be adaptable in how we guide the
live experience in front of us. This may mean you must
give more instruction or education, or this might mean
you need to adjust techniques or length of practice.
Considering your environment is another example
of duty of care and ensuring where you are or the
conditions of practice are well suited for the offering.
This may be relevant to light, temperature, safety and
surrounding or noise.

Ensure a duty of care

Ask
Ask your participants how they feel, what they might
want to get out of the sessions, are they ok with the
temperature, etc.
Assess
How do you feel about their answers, are your
techniques and planned practice helpful for the
situation. Can you adapt? Do you need too?
Respond
Deliver a practice or session that supports the
situation. Be of service and support the experience as
best as you can.
189

189

JUST BREATHE

Supporting a one to one practice
A one-to-one practice is powerful way to support someone
in a moment of need. But this is only possible with proper
understanding of techniques and practices and knowing
how and when to offer them.
A one-to-one session invites the opportunity to utilise your
NSRT (Nervous System Response Techniques) effectively
and support someone in a heightened or prolonged state
of dysregulation, hyper stimulation and distress.
What makes a one-to-one session different to a group
practice is that what you offer cannot be general, it must
be personal and it must be relevant to the individual.
Therefore you must know how to assess the breath and
decide the need (direct or gradual). No two people are
alike, and everyone experiences stress, anxiousness
and tension differently, so a one-to-one session is about
meeting people where they are, and using your training and
the multitude of techniques at your disposal to create the
right response.

Remember your breath assessment protocol; ask, asses
and respond. And ensure that you are doing your best to
support.
In a one-to-one environment, combine your offering with
breathwork, meditation and deep rest, as together they
are effective and supportive. Where possible aim for a
longer practice, 45-60mins, this will give ample time to
asses, practice and reflect. Often a longer period of time is
powerful by it’s own merit as it allows the nervous to soften
as time passes.
Be diligent in your offering, and be kind in your guidance.
Remember there is both physiological and psychological
factors in play. And remember, unless you are personally
qualified, seek further or professional help or services if
you feel that more support is needed.

Supporting a group practice
A group environment, by nature is more general. When
we are in a setting with multiple people, we can only be so
specific, but, that does not mean we cannot be effective.
A group setting is often a situation of intention, what
do you want to offer, or what is the required need of the
environment and group you’re in.

When supporting a group in practice, make sure you
ensure the space is welcoming and inviting for all, this is
also a great opportunity to create a sense of community
and belonging. As the practice is more general, it’s likely
more description or technical understanding will be
necessary, so ensure you plan accordingly.

These days, one thing you can almost always guarantee
is that people have some level of retained stress in the
body, the breath is likely dysregulated and the nervous
system is easily spiked. Sad, but true. Therefore, in these
group settings, a down regulating breath practice is always
valuable. But read the room and adapt if needed.

A group practice can be very powerful as the collective
energy and still in a group setting can be palpable and
held. While one-to-one sessions are more specifically
responsive, a group practice is a necessary approach to
help people find their way into the breathwork, meditation
and deep rest, and/or feel supported and safe in an
environment where they can feel at ease within a general
setting.

When it comes to mediation in a group setting, you have
options. If it’s a new-to-meditation crowd, then perhaps
guiding a visualisation or words to live by meditation will
offer a gentle enjoyable experience. If you are wanting to
create a sense of presence and shift the awareness state,
then body scans of 5 bodies practices can be effective
here. And you always have the being technique which
will really help create a deep connection of inwardness,
but remember that you either need to teach the
technique, or fully guide it for it to be effective. Remember
understanding, execution and commitment to technique is
essential for a being practice.

190

If you’re sharing a practice in a group setting, before,
during or after another activity; after yoga class, before
a half-marathon, at the end of a corporate meeting, then
ensure that the practices you share are supporting
the whole experience. If it’s before a run, energise and
up-regulate, if it’s post yoga, calm, ease and balance.
Remember that these practices are complementary
and integration, so all factors of consideration should be
relevant to what you are guiding.
Your set sequences like EXHALE breathwork, meditation
and deep rest practice are always effective in a group
session as it is exhale focused and down regulating and is
something always needed and usually always well received.

PRINCIPLES OF GUIDANCE

Six Styles of language delivery
1. Establish your intention

As a teacher our first responsibility is to identity the intention
of the experience, the ‘why’. This will help to set a clear path
for how you construct your practice. Without intention,
we are simply offering techniques to experience, and while
these are impactful in isolation they often only impact us
on the physical level and do not support our greater mental
or emotional well-being. When we have a clear and decisive
intention with our practices, we allow our offerings to others
to be purposeful and comprehensively supportive.

2. Select your technique

Your techniques are the foundational ingredients to creating
a powerful experience. Choose wisely your techniques,
whether breathwork or meditation, and identify which
elements will be most effective for supporting your intention.
Remember that one technique cannot suit all need states, so
ensure you are evaluating and understanding the ‘who’, ‘what’
and the ‘how’ as you select which techniques will be the most
valuable for your practice.

3. Design your sequence

Design and delivery is the most critical part of your
teaching. We must also see any practice as a comprehensive
experience, not just a simple execution of technique. Take
time to consider the order of your techniques, the sequence
for arrival, the transitions and settling time. Great techniques,
when delivered thoughtlessly, can be counter impactful for
the experience.

4. Practice your practice

Before you share, practice your offering. The best guidance
comes from real personal experience, and then using your
own insights to offer refinement and consideration. Learn
proper techniques, practice them often and this will help give
a solid foundation to constructing and offering practices.
When guiding a practice from personal experience, it allows
your guidance to come from a place of true understanding.
This is a powerful place to lead from.

5. Observe the response

Your practice is only as valuable as it is effective. Notice
how your participants respond to what you are sharing, if it
feels too much, too strong or not well received, be confident
to adapt as needed and ensure you priorities the real life
experience over the planned one. Our greatest learnings
come from observing how they are received by others, so
always look, listen and watch as each practice unfolds.

191

JUST BREATHE

‘Mindfulness is awareness that
arises through paying attention,
on purpose, in the present
moment, non-judgementally.’
JOHN KABAT-ZINN
FOUNDER OF MODERN MINDFULNESS

192

PRINCIPLES OF GUIDANCE

Conscious language

Language is a vital part of human connection. Although
all species have their ways of communicating, humans
are the only ones that have mastered cognitive language
communication. Language allows us to share our ideas,
thoughts, and feelings with others. It has the power to build
societies, but also tear them down.
Language is what makes us human. It is how people
communicate. By learning a language, it means you have
mastered a complex system of words, structure, and
grammar to effectively communicate with others.

The basic functions of language
To most people, language comes naturally. We learn how
to communicate even before we can talk and as we grow
older, we find ways to manipulate language to truly convey
what we want to say with words and complex sentences.
Of course, not all communication is through language, but
mastering a language certainly helps speed up the process.
This is one of the many reasons why language is important
Language helps us express our feelings and thoughts —
this is unique to our species because it is a way to express
unique ideas and customs within different cultures and
societies. Language helps preserve cultures, but it also
allows us to learn about others and spread ideas quickly.
The main function of language is the usefulness of language.
It gives us the ability to communicate thoughts, ideas, and
feelings with others as quickly as possible. But, within
that, we can understand language more by looking at its
basic functions.

SILENCE SPEAKS

Informative function
The informative function of language is when we use
language to communicate any information. Essentially,
its function is to inform others by being able to state
facts clearly.
Expressive function
Another basic function of language is the expressive
function. As it sounds, it is used to express oneself by giving
us ways to convey our feelings, emotions, and attitudes to
another person (or ourselves).
Directive function
The directive function of language is a basic function that
helps us to direct or command. For example, it gives us the
ability to tell ourselves or someone else what to do in any
given situation.

We must also remember that silence in its own right is
a form of communication. When someone chooses to
be silent, they are choosing to disengage purposefully.
In some occasions this will be to make a point of
resounding impact, while other times it may be to
create space so there is time to digest, consider or
provide contradictory point.

193

JUST BREATHE

Different types of language
In addition to language functions, there are also different
types of language and ways to understand language overall.
Being able to differentiate these can help you understand
other reasons why language is so important.
Oral vs. Written language
In general, oral communication is spoken language meant
for conversing with others. Written language is about
expressing ideas through writing words down. Oral
communication is usually more informal and faster, while
written language is more formal and slow.

Denotative meaning vs. Connotative meaning
Words have a lot of meaning to them, and the meaning
depends on the context surrounding the word. This is why
there is denotative meaning and connotative meaning.
Denotative meaning is the literal definition/intention of the
word, whereas connotative meaning is when words carry
positive or negative meanings/connotations. An example of
this could be “home” versus “house.” “House” is denotative,
being the literal term for this type of structure where
someone may live, whereas “home” is connotative and
represents a shelter, family, security, etc.. Understanding
the difference can help you understand the intention of
language.

Using language effectively
Language has so many benefits to humans, but it can also
be problematic if language is used ineffectively. This is why
it’s important to be mindful of how you are using language
in any situation.
Use appropriate language
Using appropriate language does not just mean avoiding
obscene language (there may be times when that is actually
appropriate for the situation!). It means using language
that’s appropriate for your audience, that they can
understand, relate to, and engage with.

Use inclusive language
Inclusive language means using language that does not
exclude any person. For instance, instead of using “he or
she” to address an audience, the correct term is “they”
to include people who may not identify with a particular
gender. It also means avoiding any language that is racist,
sexist, misogynist, hateful, presumptuous, prejudiced, etc..

Use vivid language
To use vivid language is to use imagery in your language,
to describe something as vividly as possible. It may mean
using more adjectives or onomatopoeia to illustrate what
you’re saying.

'Be sure to taste your words
before you spit them out.'
UNKNOWN

194

PRINCIPLES OF GUIDANCE

6 styles of language delivery
1. Clarity

Using language in a way that ensures the intended
audience fully understands your ideas; that your ideas
are clear.

2. Economy

Being ‘economic’ about how you speak by avoiding
any unnecessary language. This means using only the
necessary and appropriate words to express yourself
while avoiding using language your audience won’t
understand. Essentially, this means avoiding fluff or
complicated vocabulary.

3. Obscenity

This refers to ‘indecent language’, including, but not
limited to curse words and hateful remarks.

4. Obscure Language/Jargon

This is very specific language that your audience will
not understand because they are not familiar with
what you are talking about. This could be when your car
mechanic explains to you what’s wrong with your car,
but you are not a car mechanic, so you are unclear of
what they’re talking about.

5. Power

This is when someone uses language to exert power
over someone to manipulate them, command them, or
to get them to do something they want. It could also be
to demonstrate yourself as an authority in the room.

6. Variety

This is a speaker’s ability to use a combination of all the
different types of language aforementioned to
successfully and creatively get ideas across.

195

JUST BREATHE

Different language styles
Within language, there are many different styles to fit
what the speaker wants to communicate. While some
are unique to a person’s personality, some speakers may
adapt certain styles depending on the situation, even if it’s
different from how they normally speak.
Direct and indirect styles
Direct is a way to use language to indicate to a person
exactly what you want to say and/or how you’re feeling.
Indirect language means using other words or types
of communication to demonstrate you may be feeling
a certain way, but without directly saying why or what,
in other words, being indirect. If you’ve ever been in an
argument with a significant other, you probably have
experienced both of these language styles.
Personal and contextual styles
These two language styles are a bit more complex. In
general, personal style refers to an individual’s personal
way of speaking, is informal, and focuses on that individual.
Contextual styles means changing language depending
on the context of a situation. For instance, a professor
may use their personal style of speaking with friends and
colleagues, and a contextual style when lecturing their
students.
Untranslatable words
Untranslatable words are words or phrases that we have to
adapt from other languages because we do not have a word
that means the same thing in our own language. A good
example is how we say “Bon Appetit!”, because we don’t
have a good translation.

Language is changing along
with the culture

When discussing topics like inclusive language, it’s easy
to recognize that language, today, is changing alongside
culture. With technology comes trends or different ways
of speaking, like how many teenagers or young people
use slang when they speak. When societies become more
open-minded and progressive, we start accepting that
there are many other ways of speaking language.
Many of us know the answer to why is language important,
but we often take language for granted or actually
don’t think about it. Language is an important life skill,
particularly in school and in the workplace.*

*uopeople.edu/blog/why-is-language-important

196

PRINCIPLES OF GUIDANCE

The XYZ’s of verbal delivery
These are three essential variables that we have to use when using our voice:

X = volume

The volume of your voice is a dial that can be turned right up, or turned
down low. When we amplify our voice we project our words further
and allow uncertainty to fade. One way to think about this is a choice
to using your ‘outside voice’ or your ‘inside voice’, a big voice can
command the room, quiet the chatter of the room, or signify a key
moment in practice. Using a quiet voice or a subtle whisper, can amplify
a meaningful moment, invite participants to lean in or protect a sacred
moment of connection.

Y = tone

Your tone is the energy and emotion of your voice, it can create
enthusiasm, or be a firm hand, with a bright tone you can uplift the
room, with a subdued one you can settle it. Without tone, your voice
will be monotone, informational, two dimensional. Tone gives colour to
your cues and warmth to your words

Z = space & pace

Space and pace go hand and hand, because they are essentially two
sides to the same coin. The choice to give space, or not talk, is a
powerful choice when teaching. Becoming comfortable and familiar
with quiet moments ultimately gives your class an ebb and flow, or
more specifically, pace. When we give space, we create pace and with
pace, our delivery becomes dynamic and considered, this is where your
classes elevate and become interactive, responsive and respectful.
Ultimately these quiet practices are internal practices, and when we
do not give space and silence we are inviting people to prioritise an
outward attention over an inward connection.

Sharing your wisdom

Sharing your wisdom in a powerful tool when guiding
others, not only does it help to ground them, but can also
inspire them. If sharing words of wisdom is not in your
nature or you’re not sure what you would say, then use
these techniques to help script out a meaningful way
to share.
Sharing wisdom is an immediate way of elevating your
practices. Having an insightful perspective will ensure that
your participants have a deep inward experience.
This is the practice.

197

JUST BREATHE

Preparation &
consideration

Preparing your practices are both conceptual and
practical. On one hand, we must ask ourselves, ‘what is
the experience we want to create’, what is the overarching
feeling we want for the practice.
On the other hand, we must consider specifically, what,
if any, are the parameters or limitations of the class, and
also what opportunities are present that can support the
people in the room.

Guide for the room you’re in
We must prepare a practice that is relevant for the
room we’re in. As a guide we have many skills, tools and
techniques we can utilise when we’re sharing with other,
but our greatest skill is understanding what is relevant and
valuable for the s exact room you’re in.
Meet them where they are
Be aware of the room and situation that you’re teaching
in, if it’s a ‘new’ group or a beginners environment, don’t
weigh them down with a lot of technique or a multitude of
ratio breath counts. But if it’s a dedicated group, educate
them, share with them techniques that will help them be
more self-sufficient.

Create a safe space
Ensure your space is a safe place, ensure you communicate
any considerations for the environment and let people
know that nothing is mandatory through the experience.
Some people may feel an uprising of sensation or emotions,
let them know they are free to express and release as
needed. Be there to support, but know the limitations
of what your can do to help.
Be accessible, not aspirational
Offer your practice in service and in support. Be available
for questions and help to clarify any questions or queries.
Allow people to feel talked too, not talked at. Above all else,
be a human first.

'Good preparation is better
than hope or good fortune.'
198

PRINCIPLES OF GUIDANCE

'Tell me and I forget,
teach me and I remember,
involve me and I learn.'
BENJAMIN FRANKLIN

199

JUST BREATHE

NOTES

200

NOTES

201

JUST BREATHE

NOTES

202

NOTES

203

Thanks for joining us on this
Just Breathe Level 1 Training Course
Find out more about our other training
programmes at justbreatheproject.com
For inspiration, updates and more from the
community follow us on Instagram at @justbreathe
To find out more or to get in touch, please email us
at trainings@justbreatheproject.com

Disclaimer and Reserved Rights
The contents of this manual have been created and developed by
Michael James Wong on behalf of Just Breathe Ltd and owned in full.
We ask that this material is not to be shared copied publicly in any form or format
digitally or in physical duplication without the written permission by the owner.
All rights reserved, copyright 2024.

